There are many animal rights groups out there going on about how all animals need to be protected 
and any attempts to hunt and trap are nothing more than human cruelty. They use pictures of animals 
stuck in traps looking back at you with such pitiful eyes while heart-wrenching music plays in the 
background. It’s enough to make most people think that any type of animal control is wrong and can’t be justified.
There is something that they don’t tell you though, or maybe they just don’t know, but in many cases 
the animals must endure much more suffering without human intervention. Most of it caused by what the 
local hunters and trappers are trying to prevent.
My dad and brother have been trapping in our area for many years. My dad has been trapping most of his 
life but got really into it about seventeen years ago and about three years ago, as soon as he was old 
enough, my brother started going out and helping dad. They have gone to many trapping seminars and classes 
as well as going to conventions and joining state and national associations and registering for a license 
that allows them to trap. Though I don’t trap myself I have spent most of my life hearing about the how and 
why of trapping as well as research that I have done myself and information I’ve gotten from lifetime trappers 
that I have met through my dad.
So today I will tell you why trapping is necessary through 1) population control, 2) damage control, and 3) providing 
a better environment.
Body
The first reason why trapping is necessary is because it helps with population control.
According to a 2015 article on wideopenspaces.com written by Cody Assmann, animals living in densely populated areas are 
much more likely to develop debilitating diseases. In cases where predators are involved they can overhunt any prey animals 
in the area, once the prey has been hunted to where there aren’t many left the predators will then move into areas populated 
by humans.
In that same article by Mr. Assmann coyotes, whitetail deer, raccoon, and beaver are all species that have experienced 
population booms in recent decades due to a lack of predators.
Overpopulation can cause animals to eat themselves out of “house and home” so to speak. There end up being so many of 
them that there are not enough resources in the environment to support their growing population.
Without the proper control of these populations the diseases that they can contract can potentially be transferred to 
people and pets in towns and cities near these overpopulated areas.
Trapping seasons are one way that populations of certain animals are regulated. It’s not as though trappers can do whatever 
they want though, there are very strict guidelines that they must follow, some handbooks being up to 200 pages or more. A 
good example can be found on dnr.wi.gov where you can look at a pdf of the Wisconsin trapping handbooks.
In a group interview done through a forum website called trapperman.com, the men and women of this site have seen animals 
in overpopulated areas contract diseases such as mange, K-9 distemper, rabies, and malnutrition. These are all diseases that 
cause an animal to suffer a slow and painful death.
Overpopulation can also cause animals to venture closer to areas populated by people which leads to my second point.
The second reason why trapping is necessary is because of its help with damage control.
Many animals near human settlements often wander into public areas where they can hunt and endanger livestock, pets, and 
children and cause damage to property.
In an article in a magazine called Texas Fur Trappers whose website is www.txtrappers.com there is a story about coyotes 
coming into Texas and killing pets while their owners are walking them. There are even many coyote sightings in peoples’ 
yards in Cincinnati.
There are many people whose livelihoods can be threatened in these situations.
We have some friends who own farms in the area and they were having problems with coons getting into the feed that they 
give their livestock causing the feed to go bad and causing general damage around the farm. This includes getting into 
the grain bins and pooping in the corn, beans, and hay that they have stored which can be deadly to horses.
In areas near rivers and streams beavers can dam up the river causing major flooding that can lead to hazardous road 
conditions and even flooding in nearby neighborhoods.
One way to help prevent animals from wandering into towns and cities is to ensure they have an environment that can 
provide for them which brings me to my third point.
The third reason why trapping is necessary is that it provides a better environment.
Trapping is a way to preserve an animals’ population as well as their environment. As stated earlier when a species 
overpopulates an area they eat themselves out of house and home, which damages the environment and makes it harder for 
that area to maintain any kind of animal population.
In an article called ‘The Many Benefits of Trapping’ on sportsmensalliance.org Jim Wooley, Quail Forever’s Director of 
Field Operations says “Responsible harvest of furbearers helps to reduce both hen and nest predation, which is a plus for 
production of upland birds. We certainty support legal trapping from both a production standpoint and its beneficial impact 
on wildlife as well.”
Trapping not only provides a better environment for the animals but for people as well. Teaching children how to hunt and 
trap can help them learn to provide for themselves and gives them the opportunity to learn about their local environment 
and what is needed to maintain it. Many rangers and wildlife officers do not know the first thing about hunting and trapping 
themselves anymore.