FAIRY TALES 




r 




\^ 




iMMMiMii^iMaaai 



iiiiiiiiHiiiililflaiiii 



mmtm 



N I 




m 



4«» 




ri •^'^« 



M^ ill ill 



GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 



La 



A 



w, 
C 




V 



vrh', 



(A 




They Ughted hxm at once to his sleeping apartment, u^here one dreu- off his shoes 
and another hts stockings "^ 



THE WINDERMERE SERIES 

^m fALES 

0/ b^/ the 

BRaTHERS 
GRIMM 

Illustrated bif 

HOPE DUNLAP 




RAND MSNALLY Cr COMPANY 

• CHICAGO NEW YORK. • 



Copyright. 1013, by 

Rand MVNally & Compaj»t 

All rights reserved 

Edition of I937 



Made in U. S. A. 



THE CONTENTS 

PACB 

Snow-White and Rose-Red 9 

Hans in Luck 

The Wolf and the Seven Little Kids 25 

One-Eye, Two-Eyes, and Three-Eyes 29 

Cinderella ^ 

Little Red-Cap "^^ 

Rumpelstilskin ^^ 

The Goose Girl ^ 

Mother Holle ^ 

Clever Grethel 

The Water of Life '^ 

The Four Skillful Brothers 79 

The King's Son who Feared Nothing ^5 

The Frog King, or Iron Henry 92 

The Golden Goose 97 

Little Brier Rose ^°^ 

The Old Woman in the Wood ^°^ 

The Bremen Town-Musicians "^ 

The Elves 116 

King Thrushbeard ^^° 

Thumbling 

Faithful John ^^^ 

The Iron Stove ^"^^ 

The Man of Iron '52 

The Drummer ' ^ 

The Two Wanderers ^^6 

The Straw, the Coal, and the Bean 190 

The Golden Bird '92 

The Poor Miller's Boy and the Cat 202 

The King of the Golden Mountain 207 

Hansel and Grethel ^'^ 

S 



6 THE CONTENTS 

PACE 

Little Snow- White 226 

The Table, the Ass, and the Stick 237 

The Nose 250 

Rapunzel 258 

A Tale of One who Traveled to Learn what Shivering Meant . . 263 



THE ILLUSTRATIONS 

They lighted him at once to his sleeping aparhnent, where one drew 

of his shoes and another his stockings .... Frontispiece 

FACING PACE 

The end of his heard was fixed in the split oj a tree 1 6 

*' Falada is wore suitable for me, and my nag will do Jor thee" 56 

He thrust his hand through the ring without difficulty and broke offi 

an apple 88 

In a mmnent the pigeon flew up, bringing another golden key in his 

bill 112 

Tliey asked her whence she came atui whither she was going 144 

Perceiving the Gardener s boy, she called him to bring her a nosegay 

of flxrwers 160 

In five minutes they were up again, carrying the crown . . .184 



SNOW-WHITE AND ROSjE-RED 



her hut with her two children, who were called onow- 
White and Rose-Red, because they were Hke the flowers 
which bloomed on two rosebushes which grew before 
the cottage. But they were two as pious, good, indus- 
trious, and amiable children as any that were in the 
world, only Snow- White was more quiet and gentle than 
Rose-Red. For Rose-Red would run and jump about the 
meadows, seeking flowers and catching butterflies, while 
Snow-White sat at home helping her mother to keep 
house, or reading to her if there were nothing else to do. 

The two children loved one another dearly, and 
always walked hand-in-hand when they went out to- 
gether; and ever when they talked of it they agreed 
that they would never separate from each other, and 
that whatever one had the other should share. 

Often they ran deep into the forest and gathered 
wild berries; but no beast ever harmed them. For 
the hare would eat cauliflowers out of their hands, the 
fawn would graze at their side, the goats would frisk 
about them in play, and the birds remained perched 
on the boughs singing as if nobody were near. 

No accident ever befell them: and if they stayed 
late in the forest, and night came upon them, they 
used to lie down on the moss and sleep till morning; 



10 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

and because their mother knew they would do so, she 
felt no concern about them. 

One time when they had thus passed the night in 
the forest, and the dawn of morning awoke them, they 
saw a beautiful Child dressed in shining white sitting 
near their couch. She got up and looked at them kindly, 
but without saying anything went into the forest; and 
when the children looked round they saw that where 
they had slept was close to the edge of a pit, into which 
they would certainly have fallen had they walked a 
couple of steps farther in the dark. Their mother told 
them the figure they had seen was doubtless the good 
angel who watches over children. 

Snow-White and Rose-Red kept their mother's cot- 
tage so clean that it was a pleasure to enter it. Every 
morning in the summer time Rose-Red would first put 
the house in order, and then gather a nosegay for her 
mother, in which she always placed a bud from each 
rose tree. Every winter's morning Snow-White would 
light the fire and put the kettle on to boil, and although 
the kettle was made of copper it yet shone like gold, 
because it was scoured so well. In the evenings, when 
the flakes of snow were falling, the mother would say, 
"Go, Snow- White, and bolt the door"; and then they 
used to sit down on the hearth, and the mother would 
put on her spectacles and read out of a great book, 
while her children sat spinning. By their side, too, lay 
a little lamb, and on a perch behind them a little white 
dove reposed with her head under her wing. 

One evening, when they were thus sitting comfort- 
ably together, there came a knock at the door as if 
somebody wished to come in. "Make haste, Rose-Red," 



SNOW-WHITE AND ROSE -RED ii 

cried her mother; "make haste and open the door; per- 
haps there is some traveler outside who needs shelter.** 
So Rose- Red went and drew the bolt and opened the 
door, expecting to see some poor man outside; but in- 
stead, a great fat Bear poked his black head in. 

Rose-Red shrieked and ran back, the little lamb 
bleated, the dove fluttered on her perch, and Snow- 
White hid herself behind her mother's bed. The Bear, 
however, began to speak, and said, "Be not afraid, I 
will do you no harm; but I am half frozen, and wish 
to come in and warm myself." 

"Poor Bear!" cried the mother; "come in and lie 
down before the fire; but take care you do not bum 
your skin"; and then she continued, "Come here, Rose- 
Red and Snow-White, the Bear will not harm you, he 
means honorably." So they both came back, and by 
degrees the lamb, too, and the dove overcame their fears 
and welcomed the rough visitor. "You children!" said 
the Bear, "come and knock the snow off my coat." 
And they fetched their brooms and swept him clean. 
Then he stretched himself before the fire and gnmibled 
out his satisfaction; and in a little while the children 
became familiar enough to play tricks with the unwieldy 
animal. They pulled his long shaggy skin, set their feet 
upon his back and rolled him to and fro, and even ven- 
tured to beat him with a hazel stick, laughing when he 
grumbled. The Bear bore all their tricks good tem- 
peredly, and if they hit too hard he cried out, 

"Leave me my life, you children, 
Snow-White and Rose-Red, 
Or you'll never wed." 

When bedtime came and the others were gone, the 



12 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

mother said to the Bear, "You may sleep here on the 
hearth if you like, and then you will be safely protected 
from the cold and bad weather." 

As soon as day broke the two children let the Bear 
out again, and he trotted away over the snow, and ever 
afterwards he came every evening at a certain hour. 
He would lie down on the hearth and allow the children 
to play with him as much as they liked, till by degrees 
they became so accustomed to him that the door was 
left unbolted till their black friend arrived. 

But as soon as spring returned, and everything out 
of doors was green again, the Bear one morning told 
Snow- White that he must leave her, and could not 
return during the whole summer. "Where are you 
going, then, dear Bear?" asked Snow-White. "I am 
obliged to go into the forest and guard my treasures 
from the evil Dwarfs; for in winter, when the ground 
is hard, they are obliged to keep in their holes, and 
cannot work through; but now, since the sun has 
thawed the earth and warmed it, the Dwarfs pierce 
through, and steal all they can find; and what has 
once passed into their hands, and gets concealed by 
them in their caves, is not easily brought to light." 

Snow- White was quite sad at the departure of the 
Bear, but opened the door for him to go out. As he 
passed through it he caught on the bolt and left behind 
a tiny piece of his hairy coat. Through the hole which 
was made, Snow-White fancied she saw the glittering 
of gold; but she was not quite certain of it. The Bear, 
however, ran hastily away, and was soon hidden behind 
the trees. 

Some time afterwards the mother sent the children 



SNOW-WHITE AND ROSE -RED 13 

into the wood to gather sticks; and while doing so, 
they came to a tree which was lying across the path, on 
the trunk of which something kept bobbing up and down 
from the grass, and they could not imagine what it was. 
When they came nearer they saw a Dwarf, with an 
old wrinkled face and a snow-white beard a yard long. 
The end of this beard was fixed in a split of the tree, and 
the little man kept jumping about like a dog tied by a 
chain, for he did not know how to free himself. 

He glared at the maidens with his red fiery eyes, and 
exclaimed, "Why do you stand there? Are you going 
to pass without offering me any assistance?" "What 
have you done, little man?'* asked Rose-Red. "You 
stupid, prying goose!" exclaimed he. "I wanted to 
split the tree in order to get a little wood for my 
kitchen, for the bits of food which we use is soon burnt 
up with great fagots. It is not like what you rough greedy 
people devour! I had driven the wedge in properly, 
and everything was going on well, when the smooth 
wood flew upwards, and the tree closed so suddenly 
that I could not draw my beautiful beard out, and here 
it sticks and I cannot get away. There, don't laugh, 
you milk-faced things! Ugh! How silly you are ! " 

The children took all the pains they could to pull the 
Dwarf's beard out, but without success. " I will run and 
fetch some help," cried Rose-Red at length. "Crack- 
brained sheep's-head that you are!" snarled the Dwarf; 
"what are you going to call other people for? You are 
two too many now for me; can you think of nothing 
else?" "Don't be impatient," replied Snow-White; "I 
have thought of something"; and pulling her scissors out 
of her pocket she cut off the end of the beard. 



14 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

As soon as the Dwarf found himself at Hberty, he 
snatched up his sack, which lay between the roots of 
the tree, filled with gold, and throwing it over his shoulder 
marched off, grumbling and groaning and crying, "Stupid 
people! to cut off a piece of my beautiful beard. Plague 
take you!" and away he went without once looking at 
the children. 

Some time afterwards Snow- White and Rose-Red 
went a-fishing, and as they neared the pond they saw 
something like a great locust hopping about on the 
bank, as if going to jump into the water. They ran up 
and recognized the Dwarf. "What are you after?" 
asked Rose-Red; "you will fall into the water." "I 
am not quite such a simpleton as that," replied the 
Dwarf; "but do you not see this fish will pull me in?" 
The little man had been sitting there anghng, and 
unfortunately the wind had entangled his beard with 
the fishing line; and so, when a great fish bit at the bait, 
the strength of the weak little fellow was not able to 
draw it out, and the fish had the best of the struggle. 
The Dwarf held on by the reeds and rushes which grew 
near; but to no purpose, for the fish pulled him where 
it liked, and he must soon have been drawn into the pond. 

Luckily just then the two maidens arrived, and 
tried to release the beard of the Dwarf from the fishing 
line; but both were too closely entangled for it to be 
done. So the maiden pulled out her scissors again and 
cut off another piece of the beard. When the Dwarf 
saw this done he was in a great rage, and exclaimed, 
"You donkey! to take this way to disfigure my face! 
It was not enough to shorten my fine beard once, but 
you must now take away the best part of it ! I dare not 



SNOW-WHITE AND ROSE -RED 15 

show myself again now to my own people. I wish you 
had run the soles off your boots before you had come 
here!" So saying, he took up a bag of pearls which lay 
among the rushes, and without speaking another word, 
slipped off and disappeared behind a stone. 

Not many days after this adventure, it chanced 
that the mother sent the two maidens to the next town 
to buy thread, needles and pins, laces and ribbons. 
Their road passed over a common, on which here and 
there great pieces of rock were lying about. Just over 
their heads they saw a great bird flying round and 
round, and every now and then dropping lower and 
lower, till at last it flew down behind a rock. Imme- 
diately afterwards they heard a piercing shriek, and 
running up they saw with affright that the eagle had 
caught their old acquaintance, the Dwarf, and was try- 
ing to carry him off. 

The compassionate children thereupon laid hold of 
the little man, and held him fast till the bird gave up 
the struggle and flew off. As soon as the Dwarf had 
recovered from his fright, he exclaimed in his squeaking 
voice, "Could you not hold me more gently? You have 
ptilled my fine brown coat in such a manner that it is 
all torn and full of holes, clumsy and meddling rubbish 
that you are!" With these words he shouldered a bag 
filled with precious stones, and slipped away to his cave 
among the rocks. The maidens were now accustomed 
to his ingratitude, and so they walked on to the town 
and transacted their business there. 

Coming home, they returned over the same com- 
mon, and unawares walked up to a certain clean spot 
on which the Dwarf had shaken out his bag of precious 



i6 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

stones, thinking nobody was near. The sun was shining, 
and the bright stones gUttered in its beams and displayed 
such a variety of colors that the two maidens stopped 
to admire them. 

"Why do you stand there gaping?" asked the Dwarf, 
while his face grew as red as copper with rage; he was 
continuing to abuse the poor maidens, when a loud 
roaring noise was heard, and presently a great black 
Bear came rolling out of the forest. The Dwarf jumped 
up terrified, but he could not gain his retreat before 
the Bear overtook him. Thereupon he cried out, "Spare 
me, my dear Prince Bear! I will give you all my treas- 
ures. See these beautiful precious stones which lie here ; 
only give me my life; for what have you to fear from a 
little weak fellow like me? you could not touch me 
with your big teeth. There are two wicked girls, take 
them; they would make nice morsels, as fat as young 
quails; eat them, for heaven's sake." The Bear, how- 
ever, without troubling himself to speak, gave the 
bad-hearted Dwarf a single blow with his paw, and he 
never stirred after. 

The maidens were then going to run away, but the 
Bear called after them, "Snow- White and Rose-Red, 
fear not! Wait a bit, and I will accompany you." They 
recognized his voice and stopped; and when the Bear 
came, his rough coat suddenly fell off, and he stood up 
a tall man, dressed entirely in gold. " I am a king's son," 
he said, "and was condemned by the wicked Dwarf, 
who stole all my treasures, to wander about in this 
forest in the form of a bear till his death released me. 
Now he has received his well-deserved punishment." 

Then they went home, and Snow- White was married 




The end of the Dwarf i beard was caught in the split oj a trd 



SNOW-WHITE AND ROSE -RED 17 

to the prince, and Rose-Red to his brother, with whom 
they shared the immense treasure which the Dwarf had 
collected. The old mother also lived for many years 
happily with her two children, and the rose trees which 
had stood before the cottage were planted now before 
the palace, and produced every year beautiful red and 
white roses. 



HANS IN LUCK 

Hans had served his Master seven years, and at the 
end of that time he said to him, "Master, since my 
time is up, I should Hke to go home to my mother; so 
give me my wages, if you please." 

His Master replied, "You have served me truly and 
honestly, Hans, and such as your service was, such 
shall be your reward"; and with these words he gave 
him a lump of gold as big as his head. Hans thereupon 
took his handkerchief out of his pocket, and, wrapping 
the gold it in, threw it over his shoulder and set out on 
the road toward his native village. As he went along, 
carefully setting one foot to the ground before the other, 
a horseman came in sight, trotting gayly and briskly 
along upon a lively horse. "Ah," said Hans, aloud, 
"what a fine thing that riding is! One is seated, as it 
were, upon a stool, kicks against no stones, spares one's 
shoes, and gets along without any trouble!" 

The Rider, overhearing Hans, stopped and said, 
"Why, then, do you travel on foot, my good fellow?" 

"Because I must," replied Hans, "for I have a bit 
of a lump to carry home; it certainly is gold, but then I 
can't carry my head straight, and it hurts my shoulder." 

"If you like we will exchange," said the Rider; "I 
will give you my horse, and you can give me your lump 
of gold." 

"With all my heart," cried Hans; "but I tell you 
fairly you undertake a very heavy burden." 

The man dismounted, took the gold, and helped 

I8 



HANS IN LUCK 19 

Hans on to the horse, and, giving the reins into his hands, 
said, "Now, when you want to go faster, you must click 
with your tongue and cry, *Gee up! Gee up!"* 

Hans was delighted indeed when he found himself 
on the top of a horse, and riding along so freely and gayly. 
After a while he thought he should like to go rather 
quicker, and so he cried, "Gee up! Gee up!" as the man 
had told him. The horse soon set off at a sharp trot, 
and, before Hans knew what he was about, he was 
thrown over head and heels into a ditch which divided 
the fields from the road. The horse would have bolted 
off if he had not been stopped by a Peasant who was 
coming that way, driving a cow before him. 

Hans soon picked himself up on his legs, but he was 
terribly put out, and said to the countryman, "That is 
bad sport, that riding, especially when one mounts such 
a beast as that, which kicks and throws one off so as to 
nearly break one's neck: I will never ride that animal 
again. Commend me to your cow: one may walk be- 
hind her without any discomfort, and besides one has, 
every day for certain, milk, butter, and cheese. Ah! 
what would I not give for such a cow!" 

"Well," said the Peasant, "If you like, such an ad- 
vantage you may soon enjoy; I will exchange my cow 
for your horse." 

To this Hans consented with a thousand thanks, and 
the Peasant, swinging himself upon the horse, rode off 
in a hurry. 

Hans now drove his cow steadily before him, think- 
ing of his lucky bargain in this wise: "I have a bit 
of bread, and I can, as often as I please, eat with it 
butter and cheese; and when I am thirsty I can milk 



20 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

my cow and have a draft. What more can I desire?" 
Soon he came to an inn, where he halted and ate with 
great satisfaction all the bread he had brought with him 
for his noonday and evening meals, and washed it down 
with a glass of beer, to buy which he spent his two last 
farthings. This over, he drove his cow farther in the 
direction of his mother's village. The heat meantime 
became more and more oppressive as noontime ap- 
proached, and just then Hans came to a common which 
was an hour's journey across. Here he got into such a 
state of heat that his tongue clave to the roof of his 
mouth, and he thought to himself, "This won't do; I 
will just milk my cow, and refresh myself." Hans, 
therefore, tied her to a stump of a tree, and, having no 
pail, placed his leathern cap below, and set to work, 
but not a drop of milk could he squeeze out. He had 
placed himself, too, very awkwardly, and at last the im- 
patient cow gave him such a kick on the head that he 
tumbled over on the ground, and for a long time knew 
not where he was. 

Fortunately, not many hours after, a Butcher passed 
by, trundling a young pig along upon a wheelbarrow. 
"What trick is this!" exclaimed he, helping up poor 
Hans; and Hans told him all that had passed. The 
Butcher then handed him his flask and said, "There, take 
a drink; it will revive you. Your cow might well give 
no milk: she is an old beast, and at the best fit for 
nothing but the plow or the butcher!" 

"Eh! eh!" said Hans, pulling his hair over his eyes, 
"who would have thought it? It is all very well when 
one can kill a beast like that at home, and make a profit 
of the flesh; but for my part I have no relish for cow*s 



HANS IN LUCK ai 

flesh ; it is too tough for me ! Ah ! a young pig like yours 
is the thing that tastes something like, let alone the 
sausages!" 

"Well, now, for love of you," said the Butcher, "I 
will make an exchange, and let you have my pig for 
your cow." 

"Heaven reward you for your kindness!" cried Hans; 
and, giving up the cow, he untied the pig from the bar- 
row, and took into his hand the string with which it 
was tied. 

Hans walked on again, thinking how everything had 
happened just as he wished, and how all his vexations 
had turned out for the best, after all! Presently a Boy 
overtook him, carrying a fine white goose under his 
arm, and after they had said "Good day" to each other, 
Hans began to talk about his luck, and what profitable 
exchanges he had made. The Boy on his part told him 
that he was carrying the goose to a christening feast. 
"Just lift it," said he to Hans, holding it up by its 
wings, "just feel how heavy it is; why, it has been fat- 
tened up for the last eight weeks, and whoever bites it 
when it is cooked will have to wipe the grease from both 
sides of his mouth!" 

"Yes," said Hans, weighing it with one hand, "it is 
weighty, but my pig is no trifle, either." 

While he was speaking the Boy kept looking around 
on all sides, and shaking his head suspiciously. At 
length he broke out, " I am afraid it is not all right about 
your pig. In the village, through which I have just 
come, one has been stolen out of the sty of the mayor 
himself. I am afraid, very much afraid, you have it 
now in your hand! They have sent out several people, 



22 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

and it would be a very bad job for you if they found 
you with the pig. At the very least they would shut 
you up in the dark hole!" 

Honest Hans was thunderstruck, and exclaimed, 
"Ah, Heaven help me in this fresh trouble! You know 
the neighborhood better than I do. Do you take my 
pig and let me have your goose." 

"I shall have to hazard something at that game," 
replied the Boy, "but still I do not wish to be the cause 
of your meeting with misfortune"; and, so saying, he 
took the rope into his own hand, and drove the pig off 
quickly by a side path, while Hans, lightened of his cares, 
walked on homeward with the goose under his arm. 
"If I judge rightly," thought he to himself, "I have 
gained even by this exchange: first there is the good 
roast; then the quantity of fat which will drip out will 
make drippings for my bread for a quarter of a year; 
and then there are the fine white feathers, on which when 
once I have put them into my pillow, I warrant I shall 
sleep without rocking. What pleasure my mother will 
have!" 

As he came to the last village on his road there stood 
a Knife-grinder, with his barrow by the hedge, whirling 
his wheel round and singing — 

"Scissors and razors and such-like I grind; 
And gayly my rags are flying behind." 

Hans stopped and looked at him, and at last he said, 
"You appear to have a good business, if I may judge 
by your merry song?" 

"Yes," answered the Grinder, "this business has a 
golden bottom! A true knife-grinder is a man who as 



HANS IN LUCK 33 

often as he puts his hand into his pocket feels money in 
it! But what a fine goose you have got. Where did 
you buy it?" 

"I did not buy it at all," said Hans, "but took it in 
exchange for my pig." 

"And the pig?" 

"I exchanged for my cow." 

"And the cow?" 

"I exchanged a horse for her." 

"And the horse?" 

" For him I gave a lump of gold as big as my head. '* 

"And the gold?" 

"That was my wages for a seven years' servitude." 

"And I see you have known how to benefit yourself 
each time, ' ' said the Grinder ; * ' but, could you now manage 
so that you heard the money rattling in your pocket as 
you walked, your fortune would be made." 

"Well! how shall I manage that?" asked Hans. 

"You must become a grinder like me. To this trade 
nothing peculiar belongs but a grindstone; the other 
necessaries find themselves. Here is one which is a 
little worn, certainly, and so I will not ask anything more 
for it than your goose. Are you agreeable? " 

"How can you ask me?" said Hans. "Why, I shall 
be the luckiest man in the world ; having money as often 
as I dip my hand into my pocket, what have I to care 
about any longer?" 

So saying, he handed over the goose, and received the 
grindstone in exchange. 

"Now," said the Grinder, picking up an ordinary big 
flint stone which lay near, "now, there you have a strong 
stone, upon which only beat them long enough and you 



24 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

may straighten all your old nails! Take it, and use it 
carefully!" 

Hans took the stones and walked on with a satisfied 
heart, his eyes glistening with joy. "I must have been 
bom," said he, "to a heap of luck; everything happens 
just as I wish, as if 1 were a Sunday child." 

However, having been on his legs since daybreak, he 
soon began to feel very tired. He was plagued, too, with 
hunger, since he had eaten all his provision in his joy 
about the cow bargain. At last he felt quite unable to 
go farther, and was forced to halt every minute, for the 
stones weighed him down so dreadfully. Then he began 
to think what a good thing it were if he had no need to 
carry them any longer. He crept like a snail to a well 
in a field. Here he resolved to rest and refresh himself 
with a drink, and so that the stones might not be hurt 
while he was kneeling, he laid them carefully down by 
his side on the edge of the well. This done, he stooped 
down to scoop up some water in his hand, and then it 
happened that he slipped, and pushed against the stones, 
so that both presently went plump into the water. As 
soon as he saw them sinking to the bottom, Hans jumped 
up for joy, and then kneeled down and returned thanks, 
with tears in his eyes, that so mercifully, and without 
any act on his part, and in so nice a way, he had been 
delivered from the heavy stones, which alone hindered 
him from getting on. 

"So lucky as I am," exclaimed Hans, "is no other 
man under the sun!" 

Then with a light heart, and free from every burden, 
he leaped gayly along till he reached his mother's house. 



THE WOLF AND THE SEVEN 
LITTLE KIDS 

Once upon a time there lived an old Goat who had 
seven young ones, whom she loved as every mother 
loves her children. One day she wanted to go into the 
forest to fetch some food, so, calHng her seven little 
kids together, she said: "Dear children, I am going 
away into the wood; be on your guard against the Wolf, 
for if he comes here he will eat you all up — skin, hair, 
and all. He often disguises himself, but you may know 
him by his rough voice and his black feet." 

The little Kids replied: "Dear mother, we will 
remember what you say; you may go away without 
any anxiety." So the old one bleated and ran off quite 
contented, upon her road. 

Not long afterwards, somebody knocked at the hut 
door and called out, "Open, my dear children! Your 
mother is here, and has brought you each something." 

But the little Kids knew from the rough voice that 
it was a Wolf, and so they said, "We will not undo the 
door. You are not our mother; she has a gentle and 
loving voice, but yours is gruff. You are a Wolf." 

So the Wolf went to a shop and bought a great piece 
of chalk, which he ate, and by that means mads his 
voice more gentle. Then he came back, knocked at 
the hut door, and called out, "Open, my dear children! 
Your mother has come home, and has brought you each 
something " 

But the Wolf had placed his black paws upon the 

25 



26 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

window sill, so the Kids saw them, and replied, "No, 
we will not open the door. Our mother has not black 
feet. You are a Wolf." 

So the "Wolf went to a baker and said, "I have hurt 
my feet; put some dough on them." And when the 
baker had done so, he ran to the miller, saying, "Strew 
some white flour upon my feet." But the miller, think- 
ing he was going to deceive somebody, hesitated, till 
the Wolf said, "If you do not do it at once, I will eat 
you." This made the miller afraid, so he powdered 
the Wolf's feet with flour. Such are men. 

Now, the villain went for the third time to the hut, 
and knocking at the door, called out, "Open to me, my 
children! Your dear mother is come, and has brought 
with her something for each of you out of the forest." 

The little Kids exclaimed, "Show us first your feet, 
that we may see whether you are our mother." 

So the Wolf put his feet upon the window sill, and 
when the little Kids saw that they were white they 
thought it was all right, and unfastened the door. But 
who should come in? The Wolf. 

The poor little Kids were terribly frightened, and 
tried to hide themselves. One ran under the table, the 
second got into the bed, the third into the stove, the 
fourth into the kitchen, the fifth into the cupboard, 
the sixth under the washing bowl, and the seventh into 
the clock case. But the Wolf found them all out, and 
did not delay in swallowing them all up, one after 
another; only the youngest one, hid in the clock case, he 
did not discover. When he had satisfied his appetite he 
dragged himself out, and lying down upon the green 
meadow under a tree, went fast asleep. 



THE WOLF AND THE SEVEN LITTLE KIDS 27 

Soon after the old Goat came home out of the forest. 
Ah, what a sight she saw! The hut door stood wide 
open; the table, stools, and benches were overturned; 
the washing bowl was broken to pieces, and the sheets 
and pillows pulled off the bed. She sought her children, 
but could find them nowhere. She called them by 
name, one after the other; but no one answered. 

At last, when she came to the name of the youngest, 
a little voice replied, "Here I am, dear mother, in the 
clock case." She took the Kid out, and heard how the 
Wolf had come and swallowed all the others. You 
cannot think how she wept for her poor little ones. 

At last she went out in all her misery, and the young 
Kid ran by her side. When they came to the meadow 
there lay the Wolf under the tree, snoring so that the 
boughs quivered. She viewed him on all sides, and saw 
that something moved and stirred about in his body. 

"Ah, mercy!" thought she, "can my poor children, 
whom he has swallowed for his dinner, be yet alive!" 
So saying, she ran home and fetched a pair of scissors 
and a needle and thread. Then she cut open the mon- 
ster's hairy coat, and had scarcely made one slit, before 
one little Kid put his head out, and as she cut farther, 
out jumped, one after another, all six, still alive, and 
without any injury, for the monster, in his eagerness, 
had gulped them down quite whole. 

There was a joy! They hugged their dear mother, 
and jumped about like a tailor keeping his wedding day. 

But the old mother said : " Go at once and pick up some 
large stones, that we may fill the monster's stomach, 
while he lies fast asleep." 

So in great haste the seven little Kids dragged up 



28 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

a pile of stones, and put them in the Wolf's stomach, as 
many as they could bring. And then the old mother 
went, and, looking at him saw that he was still asleep, 
and did not stir, and so she sewed up the slit in a great 
hurry. 

When the Wolf at last woke up he raised himself 
upon his legs, and, because the stones in his stomach 
made him feel thirsty, he went to a well to drink. But 
as he went along, rolling from side to side, the stones 
began to tumble about in his body, and rattle, and he 
called out: 

"What rattles, what rattles 

Against my poor bones ? 
Not little Kids, I think, 

But only big stones!" 

And when he came to the well he stooped down to 
drink, and the heavy stones made him lose his balance, 
so that he fell, and sank beneath the water. 

As soon as the seven little Kids saw this, they came 
running up, singing aloud, "The Wolf is dead! The 
Wolf is dead!" and they danced for joy aroimd their 
mother by the side of the well. 



ONE-EYE, TWO-EYES, AND 
THREE-EYES 

Once upon a time there was a woman who had three 
daughters, the eldest of whom was named One-Eye, 
because she had but a single eye, and that placed in the 
middle of her forehead; the second was called Two- 
Eyes, because she was like other mortals; and the third, 
Three-Eyes, because she had three eyes, and one of them 
in the center of her forehead, like the eldest sister. But 
because the second sister had nothing uncommon in her 
appearance she was looked down upon by her sisters, 
and despised by her mother. "You are no better than 
common folks," they would say to her; "you do not be- 
long to us"; and then they would push her about, give 
her coarse clothing and nothing to eat but their leav- 
ings, besides heaping upon her numerous other insults 
as occasion offered. 

It came to pass that Two-Eyes had to go into the 
fields to tend the goat; and she went very hungry, be- 
cause her sisters had given her little to eat that morning. 
She sat down upon a hillock, and cried so much that her 
tears flowed almost like rivers out of her eyes! By and 
by she looked up, and saw a Woman standing by her, 
who asked, "Why are you weeping, Two-Eyes?" 

"Because I have two eyes like ordinary people," replied 
the girl, "and therefore my mother and sisters dislike 
me, push me into comers, throw me their old clothes, 
and give me nothing to eat but what they leave. To-day 
they have given me so little that I am still hungry." 

29 



30 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

"Dry your eyes now," said the wise Woman, and I 
will tell you something which shall prevent you from 
being hungry again. You must say to your goat: 

'"Little kid, milk 
Table, appear!' 

and immediately a nicely filled table will stand before 
you, with delicate food upon it, of which you can eat as 
much as you please. When you are satisfied, and have 
done with the table, you must say: 

'"Little kid, milk 
Table, depart! ' 

and it will instantly disappear." 

With these words the wise Woman went away, and 
and little Two-Eyes thought she would see at once if 
what the Woman said were true, for she felt very hungry 

indeed. 

"Little kid, milk 
Table, appear!" 

she said, and immediately a table covered with a white 
cloth stood before her. A knife and fork and silver 
spoon, and the most delicate dishes, were arranged in 
order upon it, and everything was as warm as if it had 
been just taken away from the fire. Two-Eyes said a 
short grace, helped herself to some food, and enjoyed it; 
and when she had finished she pronounced the words 
which the wise Woman had told her: 

"Little kid, milk 
Table, depart!" 

and the table and all that was on it quickly disappeared. 
"This is delightful housekeeping," said Two-Eyes 
in high glee. 



ONE-EYE. TWO-EYES, AND THREE-EYES 31 

At evening she went home with her goat, and found 
an earthen dish which her sisters had left her filled with 
their leavings, but she did not touch it; and the next 
morning she went off again without taking the meager 
breakfast which was left out for her. The first and 
second time she did this the sisters thought nothing of 
it; but when she did the same thing the third morning 
their attention was roused, and they said, "All is not 
right with Two-Eyes, lor she has left her meals twice, 
and has touched nothing of what was given her; she 
must have found some other way of living." So they 
determined that One-Eye should go w^ith Two-Eyes 
when she drove the goat to the meadow, and see what 
passed, and whether any one brought her anything to 
eat or to drink. 

When Two-Eyes, therefore, was about to set off, One- 
Eye told her she was going with her to see whether she 
took proper care of the goat and fed her sufficiently. 
Two-Eyes, however, divined her sister's object, and drove 
the goat where the grass was highest, and then said, 
" Come, One-Eye, let us sit down, and I will sing to you." 
So One-Eye sat down, for she was tired with her unusual 
walk in the heat of the sun. 

"Are you awake or asleep, One-Eye? 
Are you awake or asleep ? " 

sang Two-Eyes, until her sister really went to sleep. 
As soon as she was fast asleep Two-Eyes said: 

"Little kid, milk 
Table, appear!" 

and seated herself at her table and ate and drank all she 
needed. Then she again cried. 



32 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

"Little kid, milk 
Table, depart ! " 

When the table had disappeared Two-Eyes awakened 
One-Eye and said, "Come, we will go home now; while 
you have been sleeping the goat might have run about 
all over the world!" So they went home, and after 
Two-Eyes had again left her meal untouched, the mother 
asked One-Eye what she had seen, and she was obliged 
to confess that she had been asleep. 

The following morning the mother sent Three-Eyes 
to watch Two-Eyes and see who brought her food, for 
it was certain that some one must. So Three-Eyes told 
her sister that she was going with her that morning to 
see if she took care of the goat and fed her well ; but Two- 
Eyes saw through her design, and drove the goat again 
to the high grass. Then she asked her sister to sit down 
and told her she would sing to her, and Three-Eyes did 
so, for she was very tired with her long walk in the heat 
of the sun. Then Two-Eyes began to sing as before: 

"Are you awake, Three-Eyes?" 
but instead of continuing as she should have done, 

"Are you asleep, Three-Eyes?" 

she said by mistake, 

"Are you asleep, Two-Eyes?" 

and so went on singing: 

"Are you awake, Three-Eyes? 
Are you asleep, Two-Eyes?" 

By and by Three-Eyes closed two of her eyes, and went 
to sleep with them; but the third eye, which was not 
spoken to, kept awake. Three-Eyes, however, cunningly 



ONE -EYE, TWO -EYES, AND THREE-EYES 33 

shut it, too, and feigned to be asleep, while she was really 
watching; and soon Two-Eyes, thinking all safe, re- 
peated the words: 

"Little kid, milk 
Table, appear!" 

and as soon as she was satisfied she said the old words: 

"Little kid, milk 
Table, depart!" 

Three-Eyes watched all this; and presently Two-Eyes 
came and awoke her, saying, "All, sister! Have you been 
asleep? You are a good caretaker; but come, let us go 
home now." 

When they reached home, Two-Eyes again ate noth- 
ing, and her sister told her mother she knew now why 
the high-minded thing would not eat their food. "When 
she is out in the meadow," said her sister, "she says, 

•"Little kid, milk 
Table, appear!' 

and directly a table comes up, laid out with meat and 
wine, and everything of the best, much better than we 
have. Then as soon as she has had enough she says, 

'"Little kid, milk 
Table, depart!" 

and all vanishes, as I clearly saw. Certainly she did 
put to sleep two of my eyes; but the one in the middle 
of my forehead luckily kept awake!'* 

"Would you have better things than we have?" 
cried the envious mother. "Then you shall lose the 
chance!" And so saying, she took a carving knife and 
killed the goat dead. 



M GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

When Two-Eyes saw this she went out very sorrow- 
ful to the old spot and sat down where she had sat be- 
fore, and wept bitterly. All at once the wise Woman 
stood in front of her again, and asked why she was cry- 
ing. "Have I not reason to cry," replied she, "when 
the goat which used to furnish me every day with a 
dinner, according to your promise, has been killed by 
my mother, and I must again suffer hunger and thirst?" 

"Two-Eyes," said the wise Woman, "I will give 
you a piece of advice. Beg your sisters to give you the 
entrails of the goat, and bury them in the earth before 
the house door, and your fortune will be made." So 
saying, she disappeared. 

Two-Eyes went home, and said to her sisters, "Dear 
sisters, do give me some part of the slain kid; I desire 
nothing good, but let me have the entrails." The sis- 
ters laughed, and readily gave them to her; and in the 
evening she buried them secretly before the threshold 
of the door, as the wise Woman had bidden her. 

The following morning they found in front of the 
house a wonderfully beautiful tree, with leaves of silver 
and fruit of gold hanging from the boughs, than which 
nothing more splendid could be seen in the world. The 
two elder sisters were quite ignorant how the tree came 
there; but Two-Eyes saw that it had grown from the 
goat's entrails, for it stood on the exact spot where she 
had buried them. As soon as the mother saw it she told 
One-Eye to climb up and gather some of the fruit. One- 
Eye climbed into the tree, and pulled a bough toward 
her, to pluck off the fruit; but the bough flew back again 
directly out of her hands; and so it did every time she 
took hold of it, till she was forced to give up, for she 



ONE-EYE, TWO-EYES, AND THREE-EYES 35 

could not obtain a single golden apple in spite of all her 
endeavors. Then the mother said to Three-Eyes, "Do 
you climb up, for you can see better with your three 
eyes than your sister with her one." Three-Eyes, how- 
ever, was not more fortunate than her sister, for the 
golden apples flew back as soon as she touched them. 
At last the mother grew so impatient that she climbed 
the tree herself; but she met with no more success than 
either of her daughters, and grasped only the empty air 
when she thought she had the fruit. 

Two-Eyes now thought she would try, and said to her 
sisters, "Let me get up; perhaps I may be successful." 

"Oh! you are very likely to, indeed," said they, 
"with your two eyes; you will see well, no doubt!" 

But Two-Eyes climbed the tree, and as soon as she 
touched the boughs the golden apples fell into her hands. 
She plucked them as fast as she could, and filled her 
apron before she went down. Her mother took them 
from her, but returned her no thanks; and the two 
sisters, instead of treating Two-Eyes better than they 
had done, were only the more envious of her, because 
she alone could gather the fruit — in fact, they treated 
her worse. 

One morning, not long after the springing up of the 
apple tree, the three sisters were all standing together 
beneath it when in the distance a young Knight was 
seen riding toward them. "Make haste, Two-Eyes!" 
exclaimed the two elder sisters, "make haste and creep 
out of our way, that we may not be ashamed of you"; 
and so saying, they put over her in great haste an empty 
cask which stood near, and pushed under it the golden 
apples which she had just been plucking off as well. 



36 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

Soon the Knight came up to the tree, and the sisters 
saw he was a very handsome man, for he stopped to ad- 
mire the fine silver leaves and golden fruit. Presently 
he asked to whom the tree belonged. 

"Any one who would bestow one branch of it on me 
might in return ask whatsoever he desired," said the 
Knight. 

One-Eye and Three-Eyes replied that the tree be- 
longed to them; and they tried to pluck a branch 
for the Knight. They had their trouble for nothing, 
however; for the boughs and fruit flew back as soon as 
they touched them. 

"It is very strange," cried the Knight, "that this 
tree should belong to you, and yet you cannot pluck the 
fruit!" The sisters, however, maintained that it was 
theirs; but while they spoke Two-Eyes rolled a golden 
apple from underneath the cask, so that it traveled to 
the feet of the Knight, for she was vexed because her 
elder sisters had not spoken the truth. When he saw 
the apple he was astonished, and asked where it came 
from, and One-Eye and Three-Eyes said they had 
another sister, but they dared not let her be seen, be- 
cause she had only two eyes, like common folk! 

The Knight, however, would see her, and called, 
"Two-Eyes, come forth!" and Two-Eyes, quite com- 
forted, came from under the cask. 

The Knight was bewildered at her great beauty, and 
said, "You, Two-Eyes, can surely break off a bough of 
this tree for me!" 

"Yes," she replied, "that I will, for it is mine," and, 
climbing up, she easily broke off a branch with silver 
leaves and golden fruit, which she handed to the Knight. 



ONE-EYE, TWO-EYES, AND THREE-EYES 37 

"What can I give you in return, Two-Eyes?" asked 
the Knight. 

"Alas! if you will take me with you I shall be happy, 
for now I suffer hunger and thirst, and am in trouble 
and grief from early morning to late evening. Take me 
and save me!" So the Knight raised Two-Eyes upon 
his saddle, and took her home to his father's castle. 
There he gave her beautiful clothes and all she wished 
to eat or to drink; and afterwards, because his love for 
her had become so great, he married her, and a very 
happy wedding they had. 

Her two sisters were very jealous when Two-Eyes 
was carried off by the Knight; but they consoled them- 
selves by saying, "The wonderful tree remains still for 
us; and, even if we cannot get at the fruit, everybody 
that passes will stop to look at it, and then come and 
praise it to us. Who knows where our wheat may 
bloom!" The morning after this speech, however, the 
tree disappeared, and with it all their hopes. But that 
same day, when Two-Eyes looked out of her chamber 
window, behold, the tree stood before it, and there 
remained ! 

For a long time after this Two-Eyes lived in the enjoy- 
ment of the greatest happiness ; and one morning two poor 
women came to the palace, and begged an alms. Two- 
Eyes, after looking narrowly at their faces, recognized her 
two sisters, One-Eye and Three-Eyes, who had come to 
such great poverty that they were forced to wander about, 
begging their bread from day to day. Two-Eyes, how- 
ever, bade them welcome, invited them in, and took care 
of them, till they both repented of the evil they had done 
their sister in the days of their childhood. 



CINDERELLA 

Once upon a time the wife of a certain rich man fell 
very ill, and as she felt her end drawing nigh she called 
her only daughter to her bedside, and said: "My dear 
child, be pious and good, and then the good God will 
always protect you, and I will look down upon you from 
heaven and think of you.'* Soon afterwards she closed 
her eyes and died. Every day the maiden went to her 
mother's grave and wept over it, and she continued to 
be good and pious. When winter came, the snow made 
a white covering over the grave, and in the springtime, 
when the sun had withdrawn this covering, the father 
took to himself another wife. 

This wife brought home with her two daughters, 
who were beautiful and fair in the face but treacherous 
and wicked at heart. Then misfortune began in the 
poor stepchild's life. "Shall the stupid goose sit in the 
parlor with us?" said the two daughters. "They who 
would eat bread must earn it. Out with the kitchen 
maid!" So they took off her fine clothes, and put upon 
her an old gray bedgown, and gave her wooden shoes 
for her feet. "See how the once proud Princess is 
decked out now," said they, and they led her mockingly 
into the kitchen. 

Then she was obliged to work hard from morning 
till night, and to go out early to fetch water, to make 
the fire, and cook and scour. Besides this, the sisters 
treated her with every possible insult, derided her, and 
shook the peas and beans into the ashes, so that she had 

38 



CINDERELLA 39 

to pick them out again. At night, when she was tired, 
she had no bed to lie on, but was forced to sit in the 
ashes on the hearth; and because this made her look 
dirty they named her Cinderella. 

One day it happened that the father was going to 
the fair, so he asked his two stepdaughters what he 
should bring them. "Some beautiful dresses," said one. 
"Pearls and precious stones," replied the other. "But 
you, Cinderella," said he, "what will you have?" "The 
first bough, father, that knocks against your hat on your 
way homewards — break it off for me," she replied. 

So he bought the fine dresses, and the pearls and 
precious stones, for his two stepdaughters; and on his 
return, as he rode through a green thicket, a hazel bough 
brushed against him and knocked off his hat. Then he 
broke off the branch and took it with him. 

As soon as he got home he gave his stepdaughters 
what they had wished for, and to Cinderella he gave 
the hazel branch. She thanked him very much, and 
going to her mother's grave planted the branch on it, 
and wept so long that her tears fell and watered it, so 
that it grew and became a beautiful tree. Thrice a day 
Cinderella went beneath it to weep and pray; and each 
time a little white Bird flew on the tree, and, if she 
wished aloud, the little Bird threw down to her what- 
ever she wished for. 

After a time it fell out that the King appointed a 
festival, which was to last three days, and to which all 
the beautiful girls in the country were invited, in order 
that his son might choose a bride. When the two step- 
daughters heard that they might also appear, they were 
very glad, and, calling Cinderella, they said, "Comb our 



40 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

hair, brush our shoes, and fasten our buckles, for we 
are going to the festival at the King's palace!" 

Cinderella obeyed, crying because she wished to go 
with them to the dance ; and she begged her stepmother 
to allow her to do so. 

"You, Cinderella?" said she. "You are covered with 
dust and dirt — will you go to the festival? You have 
no clothes or shoes. How can you go to the dance? " 

But as she kept asking, her stepmother said at last: " I 
have now shaken into the ashes a dish of lentils. If you 
have picked them up again in two hours, you shall go." 

Then Cinderella left the room, and went out through 
the back door into the garden, and called out: "You 
tame pigeons and doves, and all you birds of heaven, 
come and help me to gather the good into the pot, and 
the bad you may eat." Presently in at the kitchen 
window came two white pigeons, and after them the 
doves, and soon all the birds under heaven flew chirp- 
ing in and down upon the ashes. Then they began 
pick, pick, pick! and gathered all the good seeds into 
the dish. Scarcely an hour had passed when all was 
completed, and the birds flew away again. Then the 
maiden took the dish to her stepmother, rejoicing at 
the thought that she might now go to the festival. But 
the stepmother said, "No, Cinderella, you have no 
clothes, and cannot dance; you will only be laughed at." 
Then as Cinderella began to cry, the stepmother said, 
" If in one hour you can pick up quite clean two dishes 
of lentils which I throw among the ashes you shall go 
with us." And she thought to herself, "She will never 
manage it." 

As soon as the two dishes had been shot into the 



CINDERELLA 41 

ashes Cinderella went out through the back door into 
the garden, and called as before: "You tame pigeons 
and doves, and all you birds under heaven, come and 
help me to gather the good into the pot, and the bad 
you may eat." Presently in at the kitchen window 
came two white pigeons, and after them the doves, and 
soon all the birds under heaven flew chirping in and 
down upon the ashes. Then they began pick, pick, 
pick! and gathered all the good seeds into the dishes; 
and scarcely had half an hour passed before all was 
picked up, and off they flew again. The maiden now 
took the dishes to her stepmother, rejoicing at the 
thought that she could go to the festival. But the step- 
mother said: "This does not help you a bit; you can- 
not go with us, for you have no clothes, and cannot 
dance; we should be ashamed of you." Thereupon she 
turned her back upon the girl, and hastened away with 
her two proud daughters. 

As there was no one at home, Cinderella went to her 
mother 's grave, under the hazel tree, and said : 

"Rustle and shake yourself, dear tree, 
And silver and gold throw down to me." 

Then the Bird threw down a dress of gold and silver, 
and slippers ornamented with silk and silver. These 
Cinderella put on in great haste, and then she went to 
the ball. Her sisters and stepmother did not know her 
at all, and took her for some foreign Princess, she looked 
so beautiful in her golden dress. Of Cinderella they 
thought not but that she was sitting at home picking the 
lentils out of the ashes. Soon the Prince came to her, 
and taking her by the hand, led her to the dance. He 



42 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

would dance with no one else, and would not even let 
go her hand; if any one else asked her to dance, he 
said, "She is my partner." 

They danced till evening, when she wished to go 
home; but the Prince said, "I will go with you, and see 
you safe," for he wanted to know to whom the maiden 
belonged. She flew away from him, however, and 
sprang into the pigeon house. So the Prince waited till 
Cinderella's father came, whom he told that the strange 
maiden had run into the pigeon house. 

Then the old man thought, "Could it have been 
Cinderella?" And they brought an ax and a pickax, 
and the Prince cut open the door, but no one was found 
within. And when they came into the house, there lay 
Cinderella in her dirty clothes among the ashes, and an 
oil lamp was burning on the chimney piece; for she had 
jumped quickly out from the other side of the pigeon 
house, and had run to the hazel tree, where she had taken 
off her fine clothes, and laid them on the grave, and the 
Bird had taken them again, and afterwards she had put 
on her little gray gown, and seated herself among the 
ashes in the kitchen. 

The next day, when the festival was renewed, and 
her parents and stepsisters had set out again, Cin- 
derella went to the hazel tree and sang as before: 

"Rustic and shake yourself, dear tree, 
And silver and gold throw down to me." 

Then the Bird threw down a much more splendid 
dress than on the first day, and when the maiden appeared 
at the ball every one was astonished at her beauty. 
The Prince, who had waited till she came, took her 



CINDERELLA 43 

hand, and would dance with no one else, and if others 
came and asked he rcpHcd as before, "She is my part- 
ner." As soon as evening came Cinderella wished to 
leave, and the Prince followed her, wishing to see into 
whose house she went; but she sprang away from him, 
and ran into the garden behind the palace. There stood 
a fine large tree, on which hung the most beautiful pears, 
and Cinderella climbed among them so nimbly that the 
boughs rustled as though a squirrel was among them ; but 
the Prince could not see whence the noise proceeded. 

He waited, however, till Cinderella's father came by, 
and said to him, "The strange maiden has escaped from 
me, and I think she has climbed up into this tree." 
The father thought to himself, "Can it be Cinderella?" 
and had an ax brought and chopped down the tree, but 
there was no one on it. When they went into the kitch- 
en at home, there lay Cinderella among the ashes, as 
before, for she had sprung down on the other side of 
the tree, and, having again taken her beautiful clothes 
to the Bird upon the hazel tree, she had once more put 
on her old gray gown. 

The third day, when her parents and her stepsisters 
had set out, Cinderella went again to her mother's grave, 

and said: 

"Rustle and shake yourself, dear tree, 
And silver and gold throw dovm to me." 

Then the Bird threw down to her a dress which was 
more splendid and glittering than she had ever had be- 
fore, and the slippers were all golden. When she arrived 
at the ball they knew not what to say for wonderment, 
and the Prince danced with her alone as at first, and 
replied to every one who asked her hand, "She is my 



44 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

partner." As soon as evening came she wished to go. 
Again the Prince followed her, but she ran away so quickly 
that he could not overtake her. But he had contrived 
a stratagem, and spread the whole staircase with pitch, 
so it happened that as Cinderella ran her left slipper 
came off. The Prince took it up, and saw it was small 
and graceful, and quite golden. 

The following morning he went with it to Cinder- 
ella's father, and said, "My bride shall be no other than 
she whose foot this golden slipper fits." The two sis- 
ters were glad of this, for they had beautiful feet, and 
the elder went with it to her chamber to try it on, while 
her mother stood by. She could not get her great toe 
into it, however, and the shoe was much too small; but 
the mother, reaching a knife, said, "Cut off your toe, 
for if you are Queen you need no longer go on foot." 

The girl cut off her toe, and squeezed her foot into 
the shoe, and concealing the pain she felt, went down 
to the Prince. Then he placed her as his bride upon 
his horse and rode off, and as they passed by the grave 
there sat two little doves upon the hazel tree, singing: 

"Backward peep, backward peep, 
There's blood upon the shoe; 
The shoe's too small, and she behind 
Is not the bride for you." 

Then the Prince looked behind, and saw the blood 
flowing; so he turned his horse back, and took the false 
bride home again, saying she was not the right one. 
Then the other sister must needs fit on the shoe, so she 
went to her chamber and got her toes nicely into the 
shoe, but the heel was too large. The mother, reaching 



CINDERELLA 45 

a knife, said, "Cut a piece off your heel, for when you 
become Queen you need no longer go on foot." 

So the girl cut a piece off her heel, squeezed her foot 
into the shoe, and, concealing the pain she felt, went 
down to the Prince, Then he put her upon his horse as 
his bride and rode off, but as they passed the hazel tree 
there sat two little doves, who sang: 

"Baclovard peep, backward peep, 
There's blood upon the shoe; 
The shoe's too small, and she behind 
Is not the bride for you." 

Then he looked behind, and saw the blood trickling 
from the shoe and that the stocking was dyed quite red ; 
so he turned his horse back, and took his false bride 
home again, saying, "Neither is this the right maiden; 
have you no other daughter?" 

"No," replied the father; "except a little Cinderella, 
daughter of my deceased wife, who cannot possibly be 
the bride." 

The Prince asked that she might be fetched ; but the 
stepmother said, "Oh, no, she is much too dirty; I dare 
not let her be seen." But the Prince would have his 
way; so Cinderella was called, and first washing her 
hands and face, she went in and curtsied to the Prince, 
who gave her the golden shoe. Cinderella sat down on 
a stool, and, taking off her heavy wooden shoes, put on 
the slipper, which fitted her to a shade. As she stood 
up, the Prince looked in her face, and, recognizing the 
beautiful maiden with whom he had danced, exclaimed, 
"This is my rightful bride." 

The stepmother and the two sisters were amazed 



46 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

and white with rage, but the Prince took Cinderella 
upon his horse and rode away; and as they came up to 
the hazel tree the two httle white doves sang: 

"Backward peep, backv/ard peep, 
There's no blood on the shoe; 
It fits so nice, and she behind 
Is the true bride for you." 

And as they finished they flew down and lighted 
upon Cinderella's shoulders, one on the right and one 
on the left, and there they remained. 

WTien the wedding with the King's son was cele- 
brated the two false sisters came and tried to get into 
favor with Cinderella and share her good fortune. When 
the bethrothed couple went to church the elder sister 
was on the right side and the younger on the left, and 
the pigeons pecked out one eye of each of them. After- 
wards, as they came back, the elder was at the left and 
the younger at the right, and then the pigeons pecked 
out the other eye of each. And thus for their wicked- 
ness and falsehood they were punished with blindness 
as long as they lived. 



LITTLE RED-CAP 

Once upon a time there lived a sweet little girl who 
was beloved by every one who saw her; but her grand- 
mother was so excessively fond of her that she never 
knew when to give the child enough. One day the grand- 
mother gave the little girl a red velvet cap, which pleased 
her so well she would never wear anything else; and so 
she was called Little Red-Cap. 

One day her mother said to her: "Come, Red-Cap, 
here is a piece of nice cake, and a bottle of wine: take 
these to your grandmother; she is ill and weak, and 
will relish them. Make haste before it gets hot; go 
quietly and carefully; and do not run, lest you should 
fall and break the bottle, for then your grandmother 
would get nothing. WTien you go into her room do not 
forget to say, 'Good morning'; and do not look about 
in all the comers." 

*T will do everything as you wish," repHed Red-Cap, 
taking her mother's hand. 

The grandmother dwelt far away in the wood, half 
a league from the village, and as Little Red-Cap entered 
among the trees she met a Wolf; but she did not know 
what a wicked beast it was, and so she was not at all 
afraid. 

"Good day, Little Red-Cap," he said. 

"Many thanks. Wolf," said she. 

"Whither away so early. Little Red-Cap?" 

"To my grandmother's," she replied. 

"What are you carrying under your apron?" 

47 



48 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

"Cake and wine," she answered. "Yesterday we 
baked the cake, that grandmother, who is ill and weak, 
might have something nice and strengthening." 

"Where does your grandmother live?" asked the 
Wolf. 

"A good quarter of a league farther in the forest. 
The cottage stands under three great oak trees; near it 
are some nut bushes, by which you will easily know it." 

But the Wolf thought to himself: "She is a nice ten- 
der thing, and will taste bett3r than the old woman; I 
must act craftily, that I may snap them both up." 

So for a short time he walked beside Little Red-Cap, 
and then he said: "Just look at the beautiful flowers 
which grow around you; why do you not look about 
you? I believe you don't hear how beautifully the 
birds sing. You walk on as if you were going to school ; 
see how merry everything is around you in the forest." 

So Little Red-Cap raised her eyes; and when she 
saw how the sunbeams glanced and danced through 
the trees, and what splendid flowers were blooming in 
her path, she thought, "If I take my grandmother a 
fresh nosegay she will be very pleased; and it is so very 
early that I can, even then, get there in good time"; 
and running into the forest she looked about for flowers. 
But when she had once begun she did not know how to 
leave off, and kept going deeper and deeper among the 
trees, in search of some more beautiful flower. The 
Wolf, however, ran straight to the house of the old 
grandmother, and knocked at the door. 

"Who's there?" asked the old lady. 

"Only Little Red-Cap, bringing you some cake and 
wine. Please open the door," replied the Wolf. 



LITTLE RED-CAP 49 

"Lift up the latch," cried the grandmother; "I am 
too weak to get up." 

So the Wolf lifted the latch, and the door flew open ; 
and, jumping without a word upon the bed, he gobbled 
up the poor old lady. Then he put on her clothes, and 
tied her cap over his head; and getting into the bed, he 
drew the curtains. 

All this time Red-Cap was still gathering flowers, 
and when she had plucked as many as she could carry 
she remembered her grandmother, and made haste to 
the cottage. She wondered very much to see the door 
wide open; and when she got into the room she began 
to feel uneasy, and exclaimed, "How sad I feel! I wish 
I had not come to-day." Then she said, "Good morn- 
ing," but received no answer. So she went up to the 
bed, and drew back the curtains, and there lay her 
grandmother, as she thought, with the cap drawn half 
over her eyes, looking very strange. 

"Oh! grandmother, what great ears you have!" 

"The better to hear you with, my child," was the 
reply. 

"And what great eyes you have!" 

"The better to see you with, my dear." 

"And what great hands you have!" 

"The better to touch you with." 

"But, grandmother, what great teeth you have!" 

"The better to eat you with ! " and scarcely were the 
words out of his mouth, when the Wolf made a spring 
out of bed, and swallowed up poor Little Red-Cap. 

As soon as the Wolf had thus satisfied his appetite 
he laid himself down again in the bed, and began to 
snore very loudly. A huntsman passing by overheard 



50 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

him, and thought, "How loudly the old woman snores; 
I must see if she wants anything." 

So he stepped into the cottage; and when he came to 
the bed he saw the Wolf lying in it. "What! do I find 
you here, you old sinner? I have long sought you," 
exclaimed he; and, taking aim with his gun, he shot 
the old Wolf dead. 

Some folks say that the last story is not the true 
one, but that one day when Red-Cap was taking some 
cakes to her grandmother a Wolf met her, and wanted 
to mislead her; but she went straight on, and told her 
grandmother that she had met a Wolf, who wished her 
good day; but he looked so wickedly out of his great 
eyes that had she not been on the highroad he would 
certainly have eaten her. 

So the grandmother said, "Let us shut the door, 
that he may not enter." 

Soon afterwards came the Wolf, who knocked, and 
exclaimed, "I am Red-Cap, grandmother; I bring you 
some cakes." But they kept quite still, and did not 
open the door. So the Wolf, creeping several times 
around the house, at last jumped on the roof, intending 
to wait till Red-Cap went home in the evening, and then 
to sneak after her and devour her in the darkness. The 
old woman, however, saw all that the rascal intended; 
and as there stood before the door a great stone trough, 
she said to Little Red-Cap: "Take this pail, child: yes- 
terday I boiled some sausages in this water, so pour it 
into that stone trough." 

Red-Cap poured many times, until the huge trough 
was quite full. Then the Wolf sniffed the smell of the 



LITTLE RED-CAP 51 

sausages, and smacked his lips, and wished very much 
to taste; and at last he stretched his neck too far over, 
so that he lost his balance, and slipped quite off the 
roof, right into the great trough beneath, wherein he 
was drowned. And Little Red-Cap ran home in high 
glee, and never did anjlhing to harm any one. But no 
one sorrowed for Mr. Wolf! 



RUMPELSTILTSKIN 

There was once a poor Miller who had a beautiful 
daughter; and one day, having to go to speak with the 
King, he said, in order to make himself appear of con- 
sequence, that he had a daughter who could spin straw 
into gold. The King was very fond of gold, and he said 
to the Miller, "That is an art which would please me 
very well. If your daughter is so very clever, bring her 
to the castle in the morning, and I will see what she 
can do." 

As soon as she arrived the King led her into a cham- 
ber which was full of straw; and giving her a wheel and 
a reel, he said, "Now set yourself to work, and if you 
have not spun this straw into gold by an early hour to- 
morrow you must die." With these words he locked 
up the room and left the girl alone. 

There she sat for a long time, thinking how to save 
her life, for she understood nothing of the art whereby 
straw might be spun into gold; and her grief became 
greater and greater, till at last she began to weep. All 
at once the door opened and in stepped a little Man, 
who said, "Good evening, fair maiden. Why do you 
weep so sore?" 

"Ah," she replied, "I must spin this straw into gold, 
and I am sure I don't know how." 

The little Man asked, "What will you give me if I 
spin it for you?" 

"My necklace," said the Miller's daughter. 

The Dwarf took it, placed himself in front of the 

52 



RUMPELSTILTSKIN 53 

wheel, and whirr, whirr, whirr! three times round, and 
the bobbin was full. Then he set up another, and whirr, 
whirr, whirr! thrice round again, and a second bobbin 
was full; and so he went on all night long, until all the 
straw was spun and the bobbins were full of gold. 

At sunrise the King came, very much astonished to 
see the gold; but although the sight gladdened him it 
only made his heart more greedy. He had the Miller's 
daughter led into another room, still larger, full of straw; 
and then he bade her spin it into gold during the night 
if she valued her life. The girl was again quite at a loss 
what to do; but while she cried the door opened sud- 
denly, as before, and the Dwarf appeared and asked her 
what she would give him in return for his help. 

"The ring off my finger," she replied. 

The little Man took the ring and began to spin at 
once, and by morning all the straw was changed to glis- 
tening gold. 

The King was rejoiced above measure at the sight 
of this, but still he was not satisfied. Leading the girl 
into another still larger room full of straw, he said, 
"This you must spin during the night; and if you succeed 
you shall be my bride." 

"For,'* thought he to himself, "a richer wife thou 
canst not have in all the world." 

When the maiden was left alone the Dwarf again 
appeared, and asked, for the third time: "What will 
you give me to do this for you?" 

" I have nothing left that I can give you," sighed the 
Miller's daughter. 

"Then promise me your first-bom child if you be- 
come Queen," said he. 



54 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

The Miller's daughter thought, "Who can tell if 
that will ever happen?" and, not knowing how else to 
help herself out of her trouble, she promised the Dwarf 
what he desired; and he immediately set about and 
finished the spinning. When morning came, and the 
King found all he had wished for, he celebrated his wed- 
ding; and the Miller's fair daughter became Queen. 

About a year after the marriage, when she had 
ceased to think about the little Dwarf, she brought a 
fine child into the world. And suddenly, soon after its 
birth, the very man appeared and demanded what she 
had promised. The frightened Queen offered him all 
the riches of the kingdom if he would leave the child. 
But the Dwarf answered: "No; something human is 
dearer to me than all the wealth of the world." 

The Queen began to weep and groan so much that 
the Dwarf pitied her, and said: "I will give you three 
days. If in that time you discover my name you shall 
keep your child." 

All night long the Queen racked her brains for all 
the names she could think of, and sent a messenger 
through the country far and wide to collect new names. 
The following morning came the Dwarf, and she began 
with "Caspar," "Melchior," "Balthassar," and all the 
odd names she knew; but at each the little Man ex- 
claimed, "That is not my name." 

The second day the Queen inquired of all her people 
for uncommon and curious names, and called the Dwarf 
"Ribs-of-bccf," "Sheep-shank," and "Laceleg"; but at 
each he said, "That is not my name." 

The third day the messenger came back and said: 
"I have not found a single new name; but as I came to 



RUMPELSTILTSKIN 55 

a high mountain near the edge of the forest, where 
foxes and hares say good night to each other, I saw 
there a httle house, and before the door a fire was burn- 
ing, and round this fire a very curious little man was 
dancing on one leg, and shouting, 

'"To-day I stew, and then I'll bake, 
To-morrow I shall the Queen's child take; 

Ah! how famous it is that nobody knows 
That my name is Rumpclstiltskin.'" 

When the Queen heard this she was very giad; for 
now she knew the name. Soon after came the Dwarf, 
and asked, "Now, my lady Queen, what is my name?" 

First she said, "Are you called Conrad?" 

"No." 

"Are you called Hal?" 

"No." 

"Are you called Rumpclstiltskin?" 

"A witch has told you; a witch has told you!" 
shrieked the little Man, and in his rage stamped his 
right foot on the ground so hard he could not draw it 
out again. Then he took hold of his left leg with both 
his hands, and pulled away so hard that his right hand 
came off in the struggle, and he hopped away, howling 
terribly. And from that day to this the Queen has 
heard no more of her troublesome visitor. 



THE GOOSE GIRL 

Once upon a time there lived an old Queen whose 
husband had been dead some years and had left her with 
a beautiful daughter. When this daughter grew up she 
was betrothed to a King's son, who lived far away; and, 
when the time for her marriage arrived, it was necessary 
for her to travel into a strange country. So the old 
lady packed up for her use much costly furniture, uten- 
sils of gold and silver, cups and jars, and, in short, all that 
belonged to a royal bridal treasure, for she loved her 
child dearly. She also sent a maid to wait upon her 
daughter and to give her away to the bridegroom, and 
gave them two horses for the journey; and the horse of 
the Princess, called Falada, could speak. 

As soon as the hour of departure came the mother 
went into a chamber, and there cut her finger with a 
knife, so that it bled; then she held a handkerchief be- 
neath, and let three drops of blood fall into it, which she 
gave to her daughter, saying, "Dear child, preserve this 
well, and it will help you on your way." 

Afterwards the mother and daughter took a sorrow- 
ful leave of each o^her, and the Princess placed the 
handkerchief in her bosom, mounted her horse, and 
rode away to her intended bridegroom. After she had 
ridden for a while she became very thirsty, and said to 
her waiting maid: "Dismount, and procure me some 
water from yonder stream in my cup which you carry 
with you, for I am very thirsty." 

"If you are thirsty," replied the maid, "dismount 

56 




' Falada is more suitable for me, and my nag will do for thee' 



THE GOOSE GIRL 57 

yourself, and stoop down to drink the water, for I will 
not be your servant!" 

Because of her great thirst, the Princess did as she 
was bid, and bending over the brook she drank of its 
water, \\'ithout daring to use her golden cup. While 
she did so she said, "Ah, Heaven!" and the three drops 
of blood answered, "If thy mother knew this her heart 
would break." But the Princess was humble, said 
nothing, and soon remounted her horse. Then she 
rode several miles farther, but the day was so hot and 
the sun so scorching that soon she felt thirsty again, 
and when she reached a stream she called her handmaid, 
and bade her take the golden cup and fill it with water; 
for she had forgotten all the saucy words which had 
passed before. 

The maid, however, replied more haughtily than 
before: "If you wish to drink, help yourself! I will not 
be your servant!" 

The Princess thereupon got off her horse, and helped 
herself at the stream, while she wept and cried, "Ah- 
woe's me!" and the three drops of blood said again, "If 
your mother knew this her heart would break." 

As she leaned over the water the handkerchief on 
which were the three drops of blood fell out of her bosom 
and floated down the stream without her observing it, 
so great was her anguish. But her waiting maid had 
seen what happened, and she was glad, for now she had 
power over her mistress; because, with the loss of the 
drops of blood, she became weak and powerless. When, 
then, she would again mount upon the horse Falada, the 
maid said, "No, Falada is more suitable for me; and my 
nag will do for thee"; and the Princess was forced to 



58 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

yield. Then the maid bade her take off her royal clothes, 
and put on her common ones instead; and, last, she made 
the Princess promise and swear by the open sky that 
she would say naught of what had passed to any human 
being at the King's palace; for if she had not so sworn 
she would have been murdered. But Falada observed 
well all that passed. 

Now was the waiting maid mounted upon Falada, 
and the rightful Princess upon the sorry hack; and in 
that way they traveled till they came to the King's pal- 
ace. On their arrival there were great rejoicings, and 
the young Prince, running toward them, lifted the wait- 
ing maid off her horse, supposing that she was the true 
bride; and she was led up the steps in state, while the 
real Princess had to stop below. Just then the old 
King chanced to look out of his window, and saw her 
standing in the court and he remarked how delicate and 
beautiful she was. Going to the royal apartments, he 
asked the bride who it was she had brought with her, 
and left below in the courtyard. 

"Only a girl whom I brought with me for company," 
said the bride. "Give the wench some work to do, 
that she may not grow idle." 

The old King, however, had no work for her and 
knew of nothing, until at last he said, "Ah! there is a 
boy who keeps the geese; she can help him." This 
youth was called Conrad, and the true bride was set to 
keep geese with him. 

Soon after this the false bride said to her betrothed, 
"Dearest, will you grant me a favor?" 

"Yes," said he, "with the greatest pleasure.' 

"Then let the knacker be summoned, that he may 



THE GOOSE GIRL 59 

cut off the head of the horse on which I rode hither, for 
it angered me on the way." 

In reahty, she feared the horse might tell how she had 
used the Princess, and she was glad when it was decided 
that Falada should die. 

This came to the ears of the Princess, and she secretly 
promised to give the knacker a piece of gold if he would 
show her a kindness. She wished him to nail the head 
of Falada over a certain large and gloomy arch in a gate- 
way through which she had to pass daily with the geese, 
so that then she might stiU see her old steed. The 
knacker promised, and, after killing the horse, nailed 
the head in the place which was pointed out, over the 
door of the arch. 

Early in the morning, when she and Conrad arove 
the geese through the arch, she said in passing: 

"Ah, Falada, that you should hang there!" 
and the head replied: 

"Ah, Princess, that you should pass here! 
If thy mother knew thy fate, 
Then her heart would surely break!" 

Then she drove on through the town to a field, and 
when they arrived on the meadow she sat down and un- 
loosened her hair, which was like pure gold. Its shining 
brightness so charmed Conrad that he tried to pull out 
a lock. So she sang: 

"Blow, blow, thou wind, 
Blow Conrad's hat away; 
Its rolling do not stay 
Till I have combed my hair, 
And tied it up behind." 



60 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

Immediately there came a strong wind which took 
Conrad's hat quite off his head, and led him a rare dance 
all over the meadows, so that when he returned, what 
with combing and curling, the Princess had rearranged 
her hair, and he could not catch a loose lock. This 
made Conrad very angry, and he would not speak to 
her, so all day long they tended their geese in silence, 
and at evening they went home. 

The following morning they passed again under the 
gloomy arch, and the true Princess said: 

"Ah, Falada, that you should hang there!" 

and Falada replied: 

"Ah, Princess, that you should pass here! 
If thy mother knew thy fate, 
Then her heart would surely break!' 

When they got into the meadow Conrad tried again 
to snatch one of her golden locks, but she sang: 

"Blow, blow, thou wind. 
Blow Conrad's hat away 
Its rolling do not stay 
Till I have combed my hair. 
And tied it up behind." 

Then the wind blew and carried the hat so far away 
that, by the time Conrad had caught it again, her hair 
was all combed out, and not a single strand was loose. 
So they kept their gccse till evening as before. 

But after they returned home Conrad went to the 
old King, and declared he v^ould no longer keep geese 
with the girl. 

"Why not?" asked the King. 

"Oh! she vexes me the whole day long," said Conrad; 



THE GOOSE GIRL 6l 

and then the King bade him tell all that had happened. 
So Conrad told how in the morning when they passed 
through a certain archway she spoke to a horse's head 
which was nailed up over the door, and said: 

"Ah, Falada, that you should hang there!" 

and it replied: 

"Ah, Princess, that you should pass here! 
If thy mother knew thy fate, 
Then her heart would surely break." 

and, further, when they arrived in the meadow, how she 
caused the wind to blow his hat off, so that he had to 
run after it ever so far. 

When he had finished his tale the old King ordered 
him to drive the geese out again the next morning, and 
he himself, when morning came, stood behind the gloomy 
archway, and heard the goose girl talk to the head of 
Falada. Then he followed them also into the fields, 
and hid himself in a thicket by the meadow, and there 
with his own eyes he saw the girl and the boy drive in 
their geese. After a while he saw her sit down and, 
unloosening her hair, which shone like gold, begin to 
sing the old rime: 

"Blow, blow, thou \s-ind. 
Blow Conrad's hat away; 
Its rolling do not stay 
Till I have combed my hair. 
And tied it up behind." 

Then the King felt a breeze come which took off 
Conrad's hat, so that he had to run a long way after it, 
while the goose girl combed out her hair and plaited it 



62 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

before his return. All this the King observed, and then 
went home, unnoticed. 

When the goose girl returned at evening he called 
her aside, and asked her what it all meant. "That I 
dare not tell you, nor any other man," replied she; "for 
I have sworn by the free sky not to speak of my griefs 
to any human being, else had I lost my life." 

The King pressed her to say what her sorrow was, and 
left her no peace about it ; but still she refused. So at last 
he said, "If you will not tell me, tell your griefs to this 
fireplace"; and he went away. Then she crept into the 
fireplace, and began to weep and lament, and soon she 
relieved her heart by telling her talc. "Here sit I," she 
said, "forsaken by all the world, and yet I am a King's 
daughter. A false waiting maid has compelled me to 
lay aside my royal clothes; and she has taken my place 
at the bridegroom's side, while I am forced to perform 
the common duties of a goose girl. Oh! if my mother 
knew this, her heart would break with grief." 

The old King, meanwhile, stood outside by the chim- 
ney and listened to what she said, and when she had 
finished he came in and called her out from the fireplace. 
Then her royal clothes were put on, and it was a wonder 
to see how beautiful she was. The old King, calling 
his son, showed him that he had taken a false bride, 
who was only a waiting maid, while the true bride stood 
there as a goose girl. The young King was glad indeed 
at heart when he saw her beauty and virtue, and a great 
feast was announced, to which all people and good friends 
were invited. On a raised platform at the head of the 
table sat the bridegroom, with the Princess on one side 
and the waiting maid on the other. But the maid was 



THE GOOSE GIRL 63 

dazzled, and did not recognize her mistress in her shining 
dress. When they had finished their feasting, and were 
beginning to be gay, the old King set a riddle to the 
waiting maid. What such an one were worthy of who 
had, in such and such a manner, deceived her masters? 
and he related all that had happened to the true bride. 
The waiting maid replied, "Such an one deserves nothing 
better than to be put into a cask, stuck all round with 
sharp nails, and then to be dragged through street after 
street by two white horses till the wretch be killed." 

"Thou art the woman, then!" exclaimed the King. 
"Thou hast proclaimed thine own punishment, and it 
shall be strictly fulfilled!" 

The sentence was immediately carried into effect, 
and afterwards the young King married his rightful 
bride, and together they long ruled their kingdom in 
peace and happiness. 



MOTHER HOLLE 

There was once a widow who had two daughters, 
one of whom was beautiful and industrious and the 
other ugly and lazy. She showed much more love, 
however, for the ugly one, because she was her own 
daughter; but she made the other do all the hard work, 
and live like a kitchen maid. The poor girl was forced 
out daily on the highroad, and had to sit by a well and 
spin and spin till the blood ran from her fingers. 

Once it happened that her spindle became marked 
with blood, so, kneeling down by the well, she tried to 
wash it off, but, unhappily, it fell out of her hands into 
the water. She ran crying to her stepmother, and told 
her misfortune; but her stepmother scolded her sharply, 
and at last was so merciless as to say, "Since you have 
let your spindle fall in, you must yourself fetch it out 
again!" 

Then the girl went back to the well, not knowing 
what to do, and, in her distress of mind, she jumped into 
the well to fetch the spindle out. She lost all conscious- 
ness, and when she came to herself again she was in a 
beautiful meadow, where the sun was shining, and many 
thousands of flowers were blooming around her. She 
got up and walked along till she came to a baker's, where 
the oven was full of bread, and the bread cried out: 
"Draw me out, draw me out, or I shall be burned. I 
have been baked long enough." So she went up, and, 
taking the bread-peel, drew out one loaf after the other. 
Then she walked on farther, and came to an apple tree, 

64 



MOTHER HOLLE 65 

hung thick with fruit, and which exclaimed: "Shake 
me, shake me! My apples are all quite ripe!" So she 
shook the tree till the apples fell down like rain, and 
when none were left on the tree she gathered them all 
together in a heap, and went farther. 

At last she came to a cottage, out of which peeped 
an old woman who had such very large teeth that the 
girl was frightened and started to run away. 

The old woman, however, called to her, saying, "What 
are you afraid of, my child? Stay with me. If you will 
put all things in order in my house, all shall go well with 
you; only you must take care that you make my bed 
well, and shake it tremendously, so that the feathers fly; 
then it snows upon earth. I am 'Mother Holle.' " 

As the old woman spoke so kindly, the girl took 
courage, and consented to engage in her service. Now 
she attended to ever>'thing to the satisfaction of her 
mistress, and always shook the bed so industriously that 
the feathers blew down like flakes of snow; therefore her 
life was a happy one, and there were no angry words; 
and she had roast or boiled meat every day. 

For some time she remained with the old woman; 
but all at once she became very sad, and did not herself 
know what was the matter. At last she found she was 
homesick; and, although she fared a thousand times 
better than when she was at home, still she longed to 
return. So she said to her mistress, " I wish to go home 
to my own people and, however well off I am here, I 
must return." 

The mistress replied, "I am pleased that you want 
to go home again, and since you have served me so truly 
I will fetch you up again myself." 



66 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

So saying, she took her by the hand, and led her 
before a great door, which she undid; and when the 
girl was just beneath the doorway a great shower of 
golden rain fell, and stuck to her, so that she was cov- 
ered over and over with gold. 

"That you must have for your industry," said the 
old woman, at the same time giving her the spindle 
which had fallen into the well. 

Thereupon the door was closed, and the maiden 
found herself upon the earth, not far from her mother's 
house. As she came into the yard the cock sat upon 
the well-side, and called: 

' ' Cock-a-doodle-doo ! 
Your golden maid's come home to you." 

Then she went in to her mother, and, because she 
was so covered with gold, she was well received. 

The girl related all that had happened; and when 
the mother heard how she had come by these great 
riches, she wished her ugly, lazy daughter to try her 
luck. So she was forced to sit by the well and spin; 
and, in order that her spindle might become bloody, she 
pricked her finger by running a thorn into it; and then 
throwing the spindle into the well, she jumped in after 
it. Then, like her sister, she came upon the beautiful 
meadow, and traveled on the same path. When she 
arrived at the baker's the bread again called out: "Draw 
me out, draw me out, or I shall be burned. I have been 
baked long enough." But she answered, "I have no 
wish to make myself dirty about you," and so went on. 
Soon she came to the apple tree, which called out: " Shake 
me, shake me; my apples are all quite ripe." But she 



MOTHER HOLLE 67 

answered, "You do well to come to me; perhaps one 
will fall on my head"; and so she went on farther. 
When she came to Mother Hollc's house she was not 
afraid of the teeth, for she had heard of them; and so 
she engaged herself to her at once. 

The first day she set to work in earnest, was very 
industrious, and obeyed her mistress in all she said to 
her, for she thought about the gold which she would 
receive. On the second day, however, she began to 
idle; on the third, still more so; and then she would 
not get up in the morning at all. She did not make the 
beds, either, as she ought, and the feathers did not fly. 
The old woman was soon tired of this, and dismissed 
her from her service, which pleased the lazy one very 
well; for she thought, " Now the gold shower will come." 

Her mistress led her to the door; but, when she was 
beneath it, instead of gold, a kettleful of pitch was 
poured down upon her. "That is the reward of your 
service,'* said Mother Holle, and shut the door. Then 
came lazybones home, but she was quite covered with 
pitch; and the cock upon the well-side, when he saw 

her, cried: 

' ' Cock-a-doodle-doo \ 
Your pitchy maid's come home to you." 

But the pitch stuck to her, and as long as she lived 
would never come off again. 



CLEVER GRETHEL 

Once upon a time there was a Cook who wore shoes 
with red rosettes, and when she went out with them on 
she used to figure her feet about here and there, and 
then say to herself, quite complacently, "Ah, you are 
still a pretty girl ! " And when she came home she drank 
a glass of wine for joy, and, as the wine made her wish 
to eat, she used to taste the best she had, and excuse 
herself by saying, "The Cook ought to know how her 
cooking tastes." 

One day it happened that the master said to her, 
"Grethel, this evening a guest is coming, so cook me 
two fowls." 

"I will do it directly, master," replied Grethel. 

She soon killed the fowls, plucked, dressed, and spitted 
them, and, as evening came on, she put them down to the 
fire to roast. They soon began to brown and were nearly 
ready, but still the guest was not come. Then Grethel said 
to the master: "If your guest does not come soon I shall 
have to take the fowls from the fire, but it will be a great 
shame not to eat them soon, when they are juiciest." 

The master agreed, therefore, to run out himself 
and bring home his guest; and, as soon as he had turned 
his back, Grethel laid aside the spit, with its two fowls, 
and thought to herself, "Ah, I have stood so long before 
the fire I am quite hot and thirsty. Who knows when 
he will come? Meanwhile, I will run down into the 
cellar and have a draft." 

Grethel ran down the stairs and filled a jug, and, 

68 



CLEVER GRETHEL 69 

saying, "God bless you, Grethcl!" took a good pull at 
the beer, and when that was done she had another draft. 
Then she went up again, and placed the fowls before the 
fire, and turned the spit round quite merrily, first spread- 
ing some butter over their skins. However, the roasting 
fowls smelled so good that Grethel thought she had 
better see how they tasted ; and so she touched one with 
her finger, and said, "Ah, how good these fowls are! It 
is a sin and a shame that they should not be eaten at 
once!" She ran to the window, to see if her master was 
yet coming with his guest, but she saw nobody, and 
turned again to the fowls. 

"Ah, one wing is burned!" said she. "I had better 
cat that!" And, cutting it off, she ate it. But then she 
thought, "Master will see that something is wanting, 
I had better take the other ! " WTien she had finished the 
two wings, she went again to see whether her master was 
coming, but he was not. "Who knows," said she, 
"whether they will come or not? Perhaps they will 
stay where they are. Come, Grethel, be of good courage! 
The one is begun; have another drink, and then eat it 
up completely, for when it is all gone you will be at rest, 
and besides, why should the good things be spoiled?" 
So thinking, Grethel ran once more into the cellar, took 
an enormous drink, and then ate up the one fowl with 
great pleasure. As soon as it was down, the master 
still not having returned, Grethel looked at the other 
fowl, and said, "Where the one is, the other ought to be 
also; the two belong to each other. What is right for 
the one is right for the other. I believe if I take another 
draft it will not hurt me." So saying, she took a hearty 
drink, and let the second fowl slip down after the other. 



70 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

Just as she was in the best of the eating, the master 
came running up, and called, "Make haste, Grethel! 
The guest is coming directly!" 

"Yes, master," said she, "it will soon be ready." 

The master went in to see if the table were properly 
laid, and, taking up the great knife wherewith he was to 
carve the fowls, he went to sharpen it upon the stone 
steps. Meantime came the guest, and knocked politely at 
the door. Grethel ran to see who it was; and, when she 
saw the guest, she held her finger to her mouth to enjoin 
silence. "Make haste quickly away," she said. "If my 
master discovers you here, you are lost ! He certainly did 
invite you to supper, but he means to cut off your ears. 
Just listen now, how he is sharpening his knife!" 

The guest listened to the sound, and then hurried 
down the steps as fast as he could go, while Grethel ran 
screaming to her master, and said to him, "You have 
invited a fine guest!" 

"Eh! what?" said he, "what do you mean?" 

"Why," replied Grethel, "just as I was about to 
serve up the two fowls, your guest took them from off 
the dish, and bolted away with them!" 

"That is fine manners, certainly!" said the master, 
grieved for his fine fowls. "If he had left me but one 
at the least, that I might have had something to eat!" 
Then he called after his guest, who pretended not to 
hear him; and so he pursued him, knife in hand, calling 
out, "Only one! only one!" meaning that his guest 
should leave one fowl behind him; but the guest sup- 
posed his host meant that he would cut off only one 
ear, and so ran faster and faster, as if fire were at his 
heels, that he might reach home safe and sound. 



THE WATER OF LIFE 

Once upon a time there was a King who was so ill 
that everybody despaired of his life, and his three sons 
were very sad, and went out into the palace gardens to 
weep. There they met an old man, who asked the 
cause of their grief, and they told him their father was 
so ill that he must die, for nothing could save him. The 
old man said, "I know a means of saving him: if he 
drinks of the water of life it will restore him to health; 
but the water is very difficult to find." 

"I will manage to find it," said the eldest son, and 
going to the sick King, he begged permission to set out 
in search of the water of life, which alone could save him. 

"No; the danger is too great," said the King; 'T 
prefer to die." Nevertheless the son begged and entreated 
so long that the King consented, and the Prince went 
away, thinking in his own heart, *Tf I bring this water I 
shall be the dearest to my father, and I shall inherit 
his kingdom." 

After he had ridden a little distance he met a Dwarf 
on the road, who asked him, " Whither away so quickly?" 

" You stupid dandyprat," replied the Prince haughtily, 
"why should I tell you that?" and he rode off. But 
the little man was angr\', and he wished an evil thing, 
so that soon afterward the Prince came into a narrow 
mountain pass, and the farther he rode the narrower it 
grew, till at last it was so close that he could get no 
farther; but neither could he turn his horse round, nor 
dismount, and he sat there like one in prison. 

71 



72 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

Meanwhile the sick King waited a long while for him, 
but he did not come; and the second son asked leave 
to go too and seek the water, for he thought to himself, 
"If my brother is dead the kingdom comes to me." 

At first the King refused to spare him; but at last 
he gave way, and the Prince set out on the same road 
the elder one had taken, and met the same Dwarf, who 
stopped him and asked him, "Whither ride you so 
hastily?" 

"Little dandyprat," repHed the Prince, "what do 
you want to know for?" and he rode off without looking 
round. The Dwarf, however, enchanted him, and it 
happened to him as it had to his brother: he came to 
a defile where he could move neither forward nor back- 
ward. Such is the fate of all haughty people. 

Now when the second son did not return, the youngest 
begged leave to go and fetch the water, and the King 
was obliged at last to give his consent. When he met 
the Dwarf, and was asked whither he was going so 
hurriedly, he stopped and replied, "I seek the water of 
life, for my father is sick unto death." 

"Do you know where to find it?" asked the Dwarf. 

"No," replied the Prince. 

"Since you have behaved yourself as you ought," 
said the Dwarf, "and not haughtily like your false 
brothers, I will tell you what you must do and show 
you where you may obtain the water of life. It flows 
from a fountain in the court of an enchanted castle, 
into which you can never penetrate if I do not give you 
an iron rod and two loaves of bread. With the rod 
knock thrice at the iron door of the castle, and it will 
spring open. Within lie two lions with open jaws, but 



THE WATER OF LIFE 73 

if you throw down to each a loaf of bread they will be 
quiet. Then hasten and fetch some of the water of life 
before it strikes twelve, for then the door will shut again 
and you will be imprisoned." 

The Prince thanked the Dwarf, and, taking the rod 
and bread, set out on his journey. WTien he arrived at 
the castle he found it as the Dwarf had said. At the 
third knock the door sprang open; and, when he had 
stilled the lions with the bread, he walked into a fine 
large hall, where sat several enchanted Princes, from 
whose fingers he drew off the rings, and he also took 
away with him a sword and some bread which lay there. 
A little farther on he came to a room wherein stood a 
beautiful maiden, who kissed him and said he had freed 
her, and if he would come in another year their wedding 
should be celebrated and he should have her whole 
kingdom. Then she told him where the fountain of 
the water of life was placed, and he hastened away lest 
it should strike twelve ere he gained it. Next he came 
into a room where a fine clean-covered bed stood, and, 
being tired, he lay dowTi to rest himself a bit. But he 
went to sleep, and when he awoke it struck the quarter 
to twelve. The sound made him hurry to the fountain, 
from which he took some water in a cup which stood 
near. This done, he hastened to the door, and was 
scarcely out before it struck twelve, and the door swimg 
to so heavily that it carried away a piece of his heel. 

But in spite of this he was ver>' glad he had procured 
the water, and he journeyed homeward and passed 
again where the Dwarf stood. \Mien the Dwarf saw the 
sword and bread he had brought away he declared he 
had done well, for vriih the sword he could destroy 



74 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

whole armies, and the bread would never come to an end. 

Now the Prince was not willing to return home to 
his father without his brothers, and so he said to the 
Dwarf, "Dear Dwarf, can you tell me where my brothers 
are? They went out before me in search of the water 
of life, and did not return." 

"They are stuck fast between two mountains," 
replied the Dwarf. "Because they were so haughty, 
I enchanted them there." Then the Prince begged for 
their release, till at last the Dwarf brought them out; 
but he warned the youngest brother to beware of them, 
for they had evil in their hearts. 

When his brothers came the young Prince was very 
glad, and he related to them all that had happened to 
him; how he had found the water of life and brought 
away a cup full of it; and how he had rescued a beautiful 
Princess, who was going to wait for him a whole year, 
when he was to return to be married to her, and receive 
a rich kingdom. 

After this tale the three brothers rode away together, 
and soon entered a country where there were war and 
famine raging, and the King thought he should perish, 
so great was his necessity. The youngest Prince went 
to this King and gave him the bread, with which he fed 
and satisfied his whole people; and then the Prince gave 
him the sword, with which he defeated and slew all 
his enemies, and regained peace and quiet. This effected, 
the Prince took back the bread and sword, and rode on 
farther with his brothers. By and by they came to two 
other countries where also war and famine were destroy- 
ing the people. To each King the Prince loaned his 
bread and sword, and so saved three kingdoms. 



THE WATER OF LIFE 75 

After this they went on board a ship to pass over 
the sea which separated them from home, and during 
the voyage the two elder brothers said to each other, 
"Our brother has found the water of hfe, and we have 
not. Therefore our father will give him the kingdom 
which belongs to us, and our fortune will be taken away." 

With these thoughts they became revengeful, and 
consulted together how they should kill him, and one 
day, waiting till he was fast asleep, they poured the 
water out of his cup and took it for themselves, while 
they filled his up with bitter salt water. 

As soon as they arrived home the youngest brother 
took his cup to the sick King, that he might drink out 
of it and regain his health. But scarcely had he drunk 
a very little of the water when he became worse than 
before, for it was as bitter as wormwood. 

While the King lay in this state, the two elder princes 
came, and accused their brother of poisoning his father; 
but they had brought the right water, and they handed 
it to the King. Scarcely had he drunk a little out of 
the cup when he felt his sickness leave him, and soon he 
was as strong and healthy as in his young days. The 
two brothers now went to the youngest Prince, mocking 
him, and saying, "You certainly found the water of life; 
but you had the trouble and we have the reward. You 
should have been more cautious and kept your eyes 
open, for we took your cup while you were asleep on the 
sea; and, moreover, in a year one of us intends to fetch 
your Princess. Beware, however, that you betray us 
not; the King will not believe you, and if you say a 
single word your life will be lost; but if you remain 
silent you are safe." 



76 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

The old King was now very angry with his youngest 
son, who had conspired, as he beUeved, against his Hfe. 
He caused his court to be assembled, and sentence was 
given that the Prince should be secretly shot. And 
once as he rode out hunting, a huntsman was sent with 
him to perform the deed. By and by, when they were 
alone in the wood, the huntsman seemed so sad that the 
Prince asked him what ailed him. 

The huntsman replied. "I cannot and yet must tell 

♦» 
you. 

"Tell me boldly what it is," said the Prince. "I 
will forgive you." 

"Alas! it is no other than that I must shoot you, 
for so has the King ordered me," said the huntsman 
with a deep sigh. 

The Prince was frightened, and said, "Let me live, 
dear huntsman, let me live! I will give you my royal 
coat and you shall give me yours in exchange." To this 
the huntsman readily assented, for he felt unable to 
shoot the Prince, and after they had exchanged their 
clothing the huntsman returned home, and the Prince 
went deeper into the wood. 

A short time afterwards three wagons laden with 
gold and precious stones came to the King's palace for 
his youngest son. They were sent by the three Kings 
in token of gratitude for the sword which had defeated 
their enemies, and the bread which had nourished their 
people. 

At this arrival the old King said to himself, "Perhaps, 
after all, my son was guiltless," and he lamented to his 
courtiers that he had let his son be killed. But the 
huntsman cried out, "He. lives yet! For I could not 



THE WATER OF LIFE 77 

find it in my heart to fulfill your commands," and he 
told the Kinj; how it had happened. The King felt 
as if a stone had been removed from his heart, and he 
caused it to be proclaimed everywhere throughout his 
dominions that his son might return and would again 
be taken into favor. 

Meanwhile the Princess had caused a road of pure 
shining gold to be made up to her castle, and had told 
her attendants that whoever should ride straight up 
this road would be the right wooer, and one whom they 
might admit to the castle; but, on the contrary, who- 
ever should ride up not on the road, but by the side of it, 
they were on no account to admit, for he was not the 
right person. When, therefore, the time which the Prin- 
cess had mentioned to the youngest Prince came round, 
the eldest brother thought he would hasten to her castle 
and announce himself as her deliverer, that he might 
gain her as a bride and win the kingdom besides. So he 
rode away, and when he came in front of the castle 
and saw the fine golden road he thought it would be a 
shame to ride upon it, and so he turned to the right hand 
and rode up by the side of the road. But as he came up 
to the door the guards told him he was not the right 
person, and he must ride back again. 

Soon afterwards the second Prince also set out, and 
he likewise, when he came to the golden road and his 
horse set his forefeet upon it, thought it would be a pity 
to travel upon it, and so he turned aside to the left 
hand and went up. When he came to the gate the 
guards refused him admittance, and told him he was 
not the person expected, and so he too had to return 
homeward. 



78 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

The youngest Prince, who had all this time been 
wandering about in the forest, had also remembered 
that the year was up, and soon after his brother's depart- 
ure he appeared before the castle and rode straight up 
the golden road, for he was so deeply engaged in 
thinking of his beloved Princess that he did not notice it. 

As soon as he arrived at the door it was opened, and 
the Princess received him with joy, saying he was her 
deliverer and the lord of her dominions. Soon after, 
their wedding was celebrated, and when it was over the 
Princess told her husband that his father had forgiven 
him and desired to see him. Thereupon he rode to the 
old King's palace, and told him how his brothers had 
betrayed him while he slept and had sworn him to 
silence. When the King heard this he would have 
punished the false brothers, but they had prudently 
taken themselves off in a ship, and they never returned 
home afterwards. 



THE FOUR SKILLFUL BROTHERS 

Once upon a time there was a poor man who had four 
sons, and when they were grown-up young men he told 
them one day that they must push their own way in the 
world, for he had nothing to give them, and so they must 
go among strangers and each learn a different trade. 
The four Brothers, therefore, took their walking staffs, 
and, after bidding their father good-by, set out through 
the town gate together. When they had traveled some 
distance they came to a point where four crossroads 
met. "Here we must separate," said the eldest Brother; 
"but in four years' time we will meet again in this place, 
and recount our several fortunes." 

Each Brother, therefore, went his way; and soon the 
eldest met a man who inquired of him where he was 
going and what he intended to do. "I wish to learn a 
trade," he replied. "Then come with me." said the man, 
"and become a thief." "No!" replied the other; "that 
is no longer an honorable employment; and, besides, the 
end of that song is that one gets used like the clapper 
in a bell." "Oh, you need not fear the gallows!" said 
the Thief. "I will teach you to get only such things as 
no other man could ever lay hold of, and to do it so that 
nobody shall ever be able to catch you or find any trace 
of you." 

Thereupon the eldest Brother let himself be persuaded, 
and under the other's teaching became such an accom- 
plished thief that nothing was safe which he set his mind 
on having. 

79 



8o GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

Meanwhile the second Brother had met a man who 
had asked him the very same questions that the first 
was asked; and, when he was told what the errand was, 
he invited the youth to become an astronomer. " There 
is nothing better than that," he said, "for nothing is 
hid from you." The youth liked the idea, and became 
such a skillful astronomer that when he had learned 
everything, and was about to travel onwards, his master 
gave him a telescope and said to him, "with that you 
can see whatsoever takes place, either on earth or in 
heaven, and nothing can remain concealed from you." 

The third Brother was taken in hand by a Huntsman, 
and received such excellent instruction in all the branches 
of the art of shooting that he became a renowned marks- 
man. On leaving, his master presented him with a 
gun, which he said would never miss, for whatever he 
aimed at it was sure to hit. 

The youngest Brother had meanwhile met a Tailor, 
and was asked whether he would not hke that trade. " I 
am not so sure about that," replied the youth; "for the 
sitting cross-legged from morning till night, the con- 
tinual stitching backwards and forwards of the needle, 
and a tailor's goose, are not altogether to my mind." 

"There, there!" cried the man, "you are talking 
about what you do not understand. You will learn 
quite a different sort of tailoring with me, and one which 
is very honorable in its way, besides being easy!" The 
youth was persuaded by these representations, and, 
accompanying his new friend, he learned the tailoring 
trade from its very basis. At leaving, his master gave 
him a needle, and told him that with it he could sew 
together whatever he pleased, even were it as tender as 



THE FOUR SKILLFUL BROTHERS 8i 

an eggshell or as hard as steel, and not even a seam 
would be visible after he had done it. 

When the four years had passed, the four Brothers 
all arrived at the same time at the crossways, and 
after embracing and kissing each other, returned home 
to their father. "Ah ! " he cried, when he saw them come 
in, "so the wind has blown you back again!" And there- 
upon they related all their adventures, and said they had 
each learned a trade. 

While they were telling their tales they sat under a 
great tree, and, as soon as they had done, their father 
said he would put them to the test. So he looked up, 
and said to his second son, "At the top of this tree, be- 
tween two boughs, there is a chaffinch's nest; now tell 
me how many eggs there are in it." The Astronomer 
took his glass, and, looking through it, said there were 
five eggs. 

" Fetch the eggs down without disturbing the mother 
bird, who is sitting on them," said the father then to 
his eldest son. The clever Thief climbed up the tree, 
and took the five eggs from underneath the body of the 
bird without disturbing or frightening her, and brought 
them to his father. 

The father took them, and la>'iug one at each comer 
of a table, placed the fifth in the middle, and told the 
Huntsman to cut them all in halves at one shot. The 
Huntsman aimed his gun, and at the first trial the five 
eggs were shot as his father wished — and surely he must 
have a good charge of powder who shoots round a comer. 

"Now it is your turn," said the old man to his other 
son; "do you sew the eggshells together, and also the 
young birds which were in them, in such a manner that 
e 



82 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

the shot may not appear to have injured them." The 
Tailor produced his needle, and soon did what was 
expected of him. 

When he had finished, the Thief had to carry the 
eggs back to the nest, and lay them again under the 
bird without her being aware of it. This he did, and a 
few days afterwards the old bird hatched her eggs, 
and the young ones had a red streak round their necks 
where the Tailor had joined them together. 

When his sons had done all these wonderful things, 
the father said to them: "Well, you have certainly 
used your time well, and learned what is very useful, 
and for this I must praise you in green clover, as the 
saying goes; but I cannot tell which of you ought to 
have the greatest praise. That must be left to be seen 
when you have an opportunity to display your talents 
publicly." 

Not long after this a great lamentation was made 
in the country because the King's daughter had been 
carried away by a dragon. Her father was overcome 
with grief all day and night long, and caused it to be 
proclaimed that whoever should rescue the Princess 
should have her for his wife. The four Brothers thought 
this was the opportunity they needed, and agreed to go 
together and deliver the Princess and so show their 
talents. "I will soon discover where she is!" cried the 
Astronomer, and, peeping through his telescope, he said: 
"I can see her already; she is on a rock in the midst of 
the sea far away from here, and watched by the dragon." 

Then he went to the King, and requested a ship for 
himself and his Brothers, in which they sailed over the 
sea till they came near the rock. The Princess observed 



THE FOUR SKILLFUL BROTHERS 83 

their arrival, but the dragon was fast asleep, with his 
head in her lap. "I dare not shoot," said the Hunter, 
when he saw them, "for fear I shall kill the Princess as 
well as the dragon." 

"Then I will try my remedy!" said the Thief; and 
slipping away, he stole the Princess out of the power 
of the dragon, but so lightly and cunningly that the 
monster noticed nothing, but snored on. Full of joy, 
they hurried with her down to the ship, and steered 
away to the open sea; but the dragon, soon awaking, 
missed the Princess, and came raging through the air 
in pursuit of her. Just as he was hovering above the 
ship, about to alight upon it, the Huntsman took aim, 
fired, and shot him through the heart. The dragon 
fell, but in his fall he crushed the whole ship to pieces, 
because of his great size and weight. Luckily they 
saved a couple of planks, and on these the four Brothers 
and the Princess floated about. They were now in a 
great strait, but the Tailor with his wonderful needle 
sewed together two planks with great stitches, and then 
collected the remaining pieces of the ship. These he 
sewed together so cleverly that in a short time the whole 
vessel was as tight and complete as before, and they 
sailed home without further accident ! 

As soon as the King again saw his dear daughter he 
was very glad, and said to the four Brothers, "One of you 
shall have my daughter to wife, but which, you must 
settle among yourselves." 

Thereupon a tremendous quarrel arose between them, 
for each pressed his own claims. The Astronomer de- 
clared if he had not seen the Princess the arts of all the 
others would have been of no use, and so she was his. 



84 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

But the Thief exclaimed, "Of what use would your 
seeing have been if I had not stolen her away from the 
dragon? The Princess is mine!" 

"But you would all have been torn to pieces by the 
dragon had not my ball reached his heart," interrupted 
the Huntsman, "so she must be mine." 

"That is all very fine!" said the Tailor. "But if it 
had not been for my sewing the ship together again you 
all would have been drowned! No, the Princess is 



mme 



When they had all spoken thus, the King decided the 
question by saying: "You have all an equal claim; but, 
since you cannot all have the Princess, not one of you 
shall have her, but instead I will give each of you the half 
of a province as a reward." 

This decision pleased the Brothers, who said, "Yes, 
it will be better so, for then we shall remain united." 
Thereupon each received half a province, as the King 
said; and in the enjoyment of this they lived happily 
with their father so long as God pleased. 



THE KING'S SON WHO FEARED 
NOTHING 

Once upon a time there was a King's son who felt 
too much dissatisfied to stay at home any longer, and as 
he feared nothing, he thought he would travel about 
the world, where the time would pass more quickly and 
there would be a chance for him to meet with wonderful 
things. So he took leave of his parents and set out, 
walking on and on from morning till night ; for it was all 
one to him whichever way the road might lead. Pres- 
ently it chanced that he came to a Giant's house, and, 
being weary, he sat down before the door to rest. He 
soon began to look about him, and saw in the courtyard 
balls and ninepins as big as men, the playthings of the 
Giant. In a httle while he took a fancy to play; and, 
setting up the ninepins, he rolled the balls at them, and 
as each one fell down he shouted for joy and pleasure. 
The Giant heard the noise, and, stretching his head out 
of the window, he saw a man no bigger than ordinary 
mortals playing with his balls. 

"You worm!" cried the Giant. "Why are you med- 
dling \\'ith my balls? Who gave you strength to do that?" 

The King's son looked up, saw the Giant, and replied, 
"You simpleton, do you think you alone have strength 
of arm? I can do anything I wish." 

The Giant thereupon came down, and looked on in 
astonishment at the bowling. But soon he said, "Child 
of man, if you are of that race, go and fetch me an apple 
from the tree of life." 

85 



86 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

"Why do you want it?" inquired the Prince. 

"I do not wish the apple formyself," said the Giant; 
**but I have a betrothed bride who longs for it. I have 
already traveled far about the worid, but cannot find 
the tree." 

"I will soon find it," replied the Prince; "and I know 
not what shall prevent me from bringing away an apple." 

"Do you think, then, it is such an easy matter?" 
said the Giant. "The garden wherein the tree stands 
is surrounded by an iron railing, and in front of this 
railing lie wild beasts close to each other, keeping watch, 
that no one shall enter." 

"They will soon let me in," said the Prince. 

"Yes, you may enter the garden and see the apples 
hanging on the tree," replied the Giant; "but still they 
are not yours; for on the tree is a ring, through which 
one must push his hand before he can reach the fruit to 
pluck it, and no one has ever yet had the luck to do this." 

"Then I shall be the first lucky one," said the Prince; 
and, taking leave of the Giant, he went over fields and 
through woods, up hill and down dale, till at last he came 
to the wonderful garden. The beasts lay around it in a 
circle, but they were all sunk in a deep sleep, and did not 
awake even when he stepped across them. So, climbing 
over the railing, he entered the garden. In the middle 
of this garden stood the tree of life, with the red apples 
glistening on the boughs. The Prince climbed up the 
trunk of the tree, and, as he reached for the fruit, he saw 
a ring hanging down, through which he thrust his hand 
without difficulty and broke off an apple. The ring slid 
down and closed tight upon his arm, and immediately 
he felt as if a stream of fresh strength were infused into 



THE KING'S SON WHO FEARED NOTHING 87 

his veins. WTicn he had come down from the tree again 
vsith the apple he would not clamber over the railing 
to get out of the garden, but went to the great gate, 
and had need to shake it only once before it sprang 
open with a crash. Then he went out, and the lion 
which had been lying down before the door jumped up, 
not in rage and anger but submissively, and followed 
him as his master. 

The Prince took the promised apple to the Giant, 
and said to him, "Sec, I have fetched it without trouble." 

The Giant was very glad to have his wish fulfilled so 
soon, and hastened to his bride to give her the apple which 
she had longed for. This bride was a beautiful and wise 
maiden, and when she saw the ring was not on the Giant's 
arm, said : " I do not believe you obtained the apple your- 
self, or else the ring would be on your arm." 

"I have only to go home and fetch it," replied the 
Giant; for he imagined it would be an easy matter to 
take the ring from the Prince by force, if he would not 
give it up willingly. So he went and demanded the ring, 
but the Prince would not part with it. "Where the 
apple is the ring must be too," said the Giant, "and, if 
you are not willing to give it to me, we must fight for it." 

For a long time they wrestled and fought, but the 
Giant could not master the Prince, who was strengthened 
by the ring. So the Giant bethought himself of a strat- 
agem, and said: "I am warm with fighting, and you 
are too. Let us plunge into the stream and cool our- 
selves before we begin again." 

The Prince knew nothing of falsehood, and, going 
to the river, he pulled off his clothes, together with the 
ring, and plunged in. 



88 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

Immediately he had done so the Giant snatched up 
the ring and ran away with it; but the lion, who had 
seen the thievish trick, pursued the Giant, and tearing 
the ring out of his hand brought it back to his master. 

Then the Giant hid himself behind a tree, and, when 
the Prince was busy drawing on his clothes again, he 
came up suddenly behind him, and, knocking him over, 
put out both his eyes. 

And now the poor Prince was blind, and knew not how 
to help himself. Then the Giant came back, and taking 
him by the hand, led him to the edge of a precipice. 
There he left the Prince standing, thinking to himself, 
"Just two steps farther and he will be a dead man, and 
the ring will fall into my hands." 

But the faithful lion had not deserted his master, 
and keeping tight hold of his clothes, gradually drew 
him back from the edge. When the Giant came to 
plunder the dead, he found his stratagem had failed. 

"Is this weak man, then, not to be destroyed?" 
exclaimed the Giant, wrathfully; and, catching hold 
of the Prince's hand, he led him by quite another path 
to the same frightful abyss; but again the faithful lion 
accompanied his master, and saved him from danger. 
As soon as they were come to the edge, the Giant let go 
of the Prince's hand, and thought the blind man would 
soon walk over; but the lion gave the Giant himself a 
push, so that he fell into the abyss and was dashed to 
pieces. 

The faithful beast then pulled his master away from 
the precipice, and led him to a tree, near which a clear 
stream ran. Here the Prince sat down, and the lion 
began to sprinkle water in his face with his paws. 




iiutui through the nng •iiihntit difficulty and broke off an apple 



/ \ 



THE KING'S SON WHO FEARED NOTHING 89 

Scarcely had a drop touched the Prince's eyeballs when 
he immediately received his sight, and saw a little bird 
which flew by and wounded itself against the trunk of 
the tree. Then it flew down and bathed in the stream, 
and soon flew away again among the trees; for it had 
regained its sight, which was lost. Here the Prince 
recognized the providence of God, and, bathing himself 
in the stream, he washed his face; and when he came out 
of the water he found he could see as well as ever he had 
in his life. 

The Prince thereupon returned thanks to God for 
His great goodness, and, accompanied by his lion, 
traveled farther a-field. It chanced next that he came 
to an enchanted castle, and at its door stood a maiden 
of fine stature and appearance, but quite black. She 
spoke to the Prince, s^iying, "Ah! could you but save 
me from the wicked enchanter who has power over me!'* 

"What shall I do to accomplish that?" asked the 
Prince. 

"You must pass three nights in the court of this 
enchanted castle," replied the maiden; "but during that 
time no fear must enter your heart. If you are troubled 
most horribly, and yet you bear it without complaint, 
I am saved, for they dare not take your life." 

"I am not afraid,'* said the Prince; "with God's 
aid, I will try my fortune." And so saying, he went 
joyfully into the hall of the castle, and when it was dark 
sat down and waited the issue. Till midnight all was 
still, and then began a mighty uproar, for out of every 
comer and chink came evil spirits. They appeared not 
to notice the Prince, for they vSat down in the middle of 
the room, and, making a fire, presently began to gamble. 



90 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

When one of them lost, he said: "It is not right; 
there is somebody here who does not belong to us, and 
it is his fault that I have lost." 

"Wait, you fellow behind the stove, I am coming!" 
cried the others. 

All the while the screaming was so awful that nobody 
could have heard it without terror; but the Prince 
remained quiet, and had no fear. At last all the evil 
spirits jumped over and upon him, and there were so 
many of them that he could not protect himself. They 
pulled him down to the ground, shook him, pricked him, 
beat him, and tormented him; but he uttered no cry. 
Toward morning they disappeared; but the Prince was 
so wearied that he could scarcely move his limbs. Soon 
the sun began to shine, and then the black maiden came, 
carrying in her hand a bottle containing the water of 
life. With this water she washed the Prince's face; 
and immediately all his strength returned and he was as 
vigorous as ever. "One night," she said to him, "you 
have luckily passed through; but there are yet two 
more to try you." So saying, she went away, and the 
Prince saw that her feet had become white again. 

The next night the evil spirits came, and renewed 
their gambols, tumbling upon and beating the poor 
Prince, as the night before, till his whole body was 
covered with wounds. Nevertheless he bore it all, and 
when day broke they were forced to leave him; and the 
maiden again appeared and healed him with the water 
of life. As she went away he observed with joy that 
she had become white as far as the tips of her fingers. 
Now he had only one more night to pass; but that 
was the worst of the three; for when the crew of evil 



THE KING'S SON WHO FEARED NOTHING 91 

spirits came, and saw him there, they shouted: "WTiat! 
are you here still? You shall be tormented now till 
your breath stops." Thereupon they beat him and 
knocked him about, threw him here and there, and 
pulled his arms and legs as if they would tear them off; 
but he endured it all, and made no outcry. When tlie 
spirits left the Prince lay quite helpless and unable to 
stir; he could not even open his eyes wide enough to 
see the black maiden, who at daybreak came in with 
the water of life. 

Then all at once his aches and pains left him, and he 
felt quite refreshed and as strong as if he had awakened 
from sleep. When he opened his eyes he saw the maiden 
standing by him, with a snow-white skin, and a face as 
fair as the bright daylight. 

"Arise," said she, "and wave your sword thrice 
over the stairs. Then all will be saved!" 

As soon as the Prince did this the whole castle was 
freed from enchantment; and the maiden became what 
she really was, a rich Princess. Presently the servants 
entered and said the table was laid in the great hall, 
and the meat placed upon it. So the Prince and Princess 
sat down and dined together, and in the evening their 
wedding was celebrated with great magnificence and 
rejoicing. 



THE FROG KING, OR IRON HENRY 

In the olden time, when wishing still helped one, 
there lived a King whose daughters were all beautiful; 
but the youngest was so exceedingly beautiful that 
the sun himself, although he saw her very often, was 
surprised whenever he shone on her face. 

Near the castle of this King lay a large and gloomy 
forest, and in the midst stood an old beech tree, beneath 
whose branches was a well; whenever it was very hot 
the King's youngest daughter ran off into this wood, 
and sat down by the side of the cool fountain ; and when 
she felt dull she would often divert herself by throwing 
a golden ball up in the air and catching it. And this 
ball was her favorite plaything. 

Now, one day, it so happened that this golden ball, 
when the King's daughter threw it into the air, did not 
fall down into her hand, but on to the grass; and then 
it rolled past her into the little fountain. The King's 
daughter followed the ball with her eyes, but it dis- 
appeared beneath the water, and the well was so deep 
that no one could see the bottom. Then she began 
to lament, and to cry louder and louder; and, as 
she cried, a voice called out, "Why weepest thou, 
O King's daughter? Thy tears would melt even a 
stone to pity." 

And she looked around to the spot whence the voice 
came, and saw a Frog stretching his thick ugly head out 
of the water. 

"Ah! you old water paddler," said she, **was it you 

92 



THE FROG KING, OR IRON HENRY 93 

that spoke? I am weeping for my golden ball, which 
has slipped away from me into the water." 

"Be quiet, and do not weep," answered the Frog. 
" I can help thee. But what wilt thou give me if I fetch 
thy plaything up again?" 

"What will you have, dear Frog?" she said, "my 
dresses, my pearls and jewels, or the golden crown which 
I wear?" 

The Frog answered, "Dresses, or jewels, or golden 
crowns are not for me; but if thou wilt love me, and let 
me be thy companion and playfellow, and sit at thy 
table, and eat from thy little golden plate, and drink 
out of thy cup, and sleep in thy little bed, — if thou wilt 
promise me all these, then will I dive down and fetch 
up thy golden ball." 

"Oh, I will promise you all," said she, "if you will 
only get me my ball." But she thought to herself, 
"What is the silly Frog chattering about? I^et him 
remain in the water with his equals; he cannot be a 
companion to any human being!" 

But the Frog, as soon as he had received her promise, 
drew his head under the water and dived down. Pres- 
ently he swam up again with the ball in his mouth, and 
threw it on the grass. The King's daughter was full 
of joy when she again saw her beautiful plaything; 
and taking it up, she ran off immediately. 

"Stop! stop!" cried the Frog; "take me with thee. 
I cannot run as thou canst." 

But all his croaking was useless; although it was 
loud enough, the King's daughter did not hear it, but, 
hastening home, soon forgot the poor Frog, who was 
obliged to leap back into the fountain. 



94 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

The next day, when the King's daughter was sitting 
at table with her father and all his courtiers, and was 
eating from her own little golden plate, something 
was heard coming up the marble stairs, splish-splash, 
splish-splash ; and when it arrived at the top, it knocked 
at the door, and a voice said, "Open the door, thou 
youngest daughter of the King!" 

So she rose and went to see who it was that called 
her; but when she had opened the door she saw the 
Frog before her. Then she slammed the door in great 
haste, and sat down at the table, looking very pale. 

But the King perceived that her heart was beating 
violently, and asked her whether it was a giant at the 
door who had come to fetch her away. 

"Oh, no!" answered she; "it is no giant, but an ugly 
Frog." 

"What does the Frog want with you?" said the King 

"Oh, dear father, when I was sitting yesterday play- 
ing by the fountain my golden ball fell into the water 
and this Frog fetched it up again because I cried so much. 
But first, I must tell you, he pressed me so that I promised 
him he should be my companion. I never thought 
that he could come out of the water, but somehow he 
has jumped out, and now he wants to come in here." 

At that moment there was another knock, and a 

voice said: 

"King's daughter, youngest, 
Open the door. 
Hast thou forgotten 

Thy promises made 
By the banks of the streamlet, 

Beneath the beech-shade? 
King's daughter, youngest, 
Open the door." 



THE FROG KING, OR IRON HENRY 95 

Then the King said, "What you have promised, that 
you must perfoim; go and let him in." 

So the King's daughter went and opened the door, 
and the Frog hopped in after her step by step to her 
chair; and as soon as she was seated, the Frog said, 
** Take me up." But she hesitated so long that at last the 
King commanded her to obey. As soon as the Frog sat 
on the chair he jumped on to the table and said, "Now 
push thy plate near mc, that we may eat together." 
And she did so, but, as every one saw, very unwillingly. 
The Frog seemed to enjoy his dinner very much, but 
every bit that the King's daughter ate nearly choked 
her, till at last the Frog said, " I have satisfied my hunger 
and feel very tired; wilt thou carry me upstairs now 
into thy chamber, and make thy bed ready that we may 
sleep together?" 

At this speech the King's daughter began to cry, 
for she was afraid of the cold Frog, and dared not touch 
him; and now he actually wanted to sleep in her own 
beautiful, clean bed! 

But her tears only made the King angry, and he 
said, "He who helped you in the time of your trouble 
must not now be despised." So she took the Frog up 
with two fingers and put him in a comer of her room. 
But as she lay in her bed he crept up to it and said, 
"I am so very tired that I shall sleep well; do take me 
up or I will tell thy father." 

This speech put the King's daughter in a terrible 
passion, and, catching the Frog up, she threw him with 
all her strength against the wall, saying, "Now, will 
you be quiet, you ugly Frog!" 

But as he fell he was changed from a frog into a 



96 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

handsome Prince with beautiful eyes, who after a little 
while became, with her father's consent, her dear com- 
panion and betrothed. Then he told her how he had 
been transformed by an evil Witch, and that no one but 
herself would have had the power to take him out of 
the fountain; and that on the morrow they would go 
together into his own kingdom. 

The next morning, as soon as the sun rose, a carriage, 
drawn by eight white horses, with ostrich feathers on 
their heads, and golden bridles, drove up to the door 
of the palace, and behind the carriage stood the Prince's 
servant, trusty Henry. When his master was changed 
into a frog, trusty Henry had grieved so much that he 
had bound three iron bands round his heart, for fear 
it would break with sadness and sorrow. But now 
that the carriage was ready to carry the young Prince 
to his own country, faithful Henry helped in the bride 
and bridegroom, and placed himself on the seat behind, 
full of joy at his master's release. They had not pro- 
ceeded far when the Prince heard a crack as if some- 
thing had broken; so he put his head out of the window 
and cried, "Henry, the carriage is breaking"; but Henry 
answered, "It was not the carriage, my master, but a 
band which I bound round my heart when it was in such 
grief because you were changed into a frog." 

Twice afterwards on the journey there was the same 
noise, and each time the Prince thought that some 
part of the carriage had given way; but it was only the 
breaking of the bands which bound the heart of trusty 
Henry, because his master was now free and happy. 



TIIK GOLDEN GOOSE 

There was once a man who had three sons, the 
youngest of whom was named Dummhng, and on that 
account was despised and sHghted, and put back on 
every occasion. It happened that the eldest wished to 
go into the forest to hew wood, and before he went his 
mother gave him a beautiful sweet cake and a bottle 
of wine to take with him. 

Just as he got into the forest he met a gray old man, 
who bade him good day, and said, "Give me a piece of 
your cake and a sip of your wine, for I am very hungry 
and thirsty." 

The prudent youth, however, would not, saying, "If 
I should give you my cake and wine, I shall have 
nothing left for myself; no, pack off!" and he left the 
man there and went onward. 

He now began to hew down a tree, but he had not 
made many strokes before he missed his aim, and the 
ax cut into his arm so deeply he was forced to go home 
and have it bound up. But this was the little old 
man's doing. 

Afterwards the second son went into the forest, and 
the mother gave him, as she had given the eldest, a cake 
and a bottle of wine. The same little old man met him 
also, and requested a piece of his cake and a draft from 
his bottle. But he likewise refused, and said, "What 
I give to you I cannot have for myself; go, take your- 
self off!" and, so speaking, he left the old man there 
and went onwards. His punishment, however, soon 

' 97 



98 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

came, for when he had made two strokes at the tree he 
cut his own leg, so that he had to be carried home. 

Then Dummhng asked his father to let him go and 
hew wood. But this father said: "No; your brothers 
have harmed themselves doing it, and so will you, for 
you do not understand anything about it." 

But Dummling begged and prayed so long that his 
father at length said, "Well, then, go, and you will 
become prudent through experience." His mother gave 
him only a cake which had been baked in the ashes, and 
a bottle of sour beer. As he entered the forest the same 
gray old man greeted him, and said, "Give me a piece 
of your cake and a draft out of your bottle, for I am 
hungry and thirsty." 

Dummhng answered, "I have only a cake baked in 
the ashes and a bottle of sour beer, but, if they will suit 
you, let us sit down and eat." 

They sat down, and as soon as Dummling took out 
his cake, lo! it was changed into a nice, sweet cake, and 
the sour beer had become wine. They ate and drank, 
and when they had done, the little man said, "Because 
you have a good heart, and have willingly shared what 
you had, I will make you lucky. There stands an old 
tree; cut it down, and you will find something at the 
roots." Thereupon the little man took leave of him. 

Dummling went directly and cut down the tree, and 
when it fell there sat among the roots a goose with 
feathers of pure gold. He took it up and carried it with 
him to an inn, where he intended to pass the night. The 
landlord had three daughters, who, as soon as they saw 
the goose, were very curious about such a wonderful 
bird, and would have liked to have one of its feathers. 



THE GOLDEN GOOSE 99 

The eldest girl thought she wuukl watch for an oppor- 
tunity to pluck one, and just as Uummling was going 
out she caught hold of one of the wings, but her finger 
and thumb stuck there and she could not get away. 
Soon after came the second, desiring also to pluck out 
a feathci ; but scarcely had she touched her sister when 
she was bound fast to her. At last the third came also, 
with like intention, and the others exclaimed, "Keep 
away, for heaven's sake, keep away!" But she did 
not see why she should keep away, and thought, "The 
others are there, why should not I be too?" and, spring- 
ing up to them, she touched her sister, and at once was 
made fast. So they had to pass the night with the goose. 

The next morning Dummling took the goose under 
his arm and went out, without troubling himself about 
the three girls, who were still hanging on, and who were 
obliged to keep on the run behind him, now to the left 
and now to the right, just as he thought proper. 

In the middle of a field the Parson met them, and when 
he saw the procession he cried out: "For shame, you 
good-for-nothing wenches, what are you running after 
that young man across the fields for? Come, pray leave 
off that sport!" 

So saying, he took the youngest by the hand and tried 
to pull her away, but as soon as he touched her he also 
stuck fast, and was forced to follow in the train. 

Soon after came the Clerk, and saw his master the Par- 
son following in the footsteps of the three maidens. The 
sight astonished him greatly, and he called : " Halloa, your 
reverence! Where are you going so quickly? Have 
you forgotten that there is a christening to-day?" and 
he ran up to the Parson and caught him by the gown. 



loo GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

The Clerk also could not release himself, and so 
there tramped the five, one behind another, till they 
met two countrymen returning from the fields with their 
hoes in their hands. The Parson called out to them, 
and begged them to come and release him and the Clerk; 
but no sooner had they touched the Clerk than they 
stuck fast to him, and so now there were seven, all in a 
line, following behind Dummling and the golden goose. 

By and by he came into a city where a King ruled 
who had a daughter so serious that no one could make 
her laugh; so he had made a law that whoever should 
cause her to laugh should have her to wife. 

Now when Dummling heard this he went with his 
goose and all his train before the Princess. As soon as 
she saw these seven poor creatures contmually on the 
trot behind one another, she began to laugh so heartily 
it seemed as if she were never going to cease. 

Dummling thereupon demanded his bride; but his 
intended son-in-law did not please the King, who, after 
a variety of excuses, as last said he must bring him a 
man who could drink a cellarful of wine. 

Dummling bethought himself of the gray little man, 
who would, no doubt, be able to help him; and going 
into the forest, on the same spot where he had felled 
the tree he saw a man sitting with a very melancholy 
countenance. Dummling asked him what he was taking 
to heart so sorely and the gray little man answered, "I 
have such a great thirst I cannot quench it; for cold 
water I cannot bear, and a cask of wine I soon empty. 
What good is such a drop as that to a hot stone?" 

"There I can help you," said Dummling. "Come 
with me, and you shall be satisfied." 



THE GOLDEN GOOSE loi 

He led him into the King's cellar, and the man drank 
and drank away at the cask, and before the day was out 
he had emptied all the wine barrels. 

Dummling now demanded his bride again, but the 
King was vexed that such an ugly fellow, whom every 
one called Dummling, should take away his daughter, 
and he made a new condition that Dummling must first 
find a man who could cat a whole mountain of bread. 

Dummling did not consider long, but set off into 
the forest, where, on the same spot as before, there sat 
a man, who was strapping his body round with a leather 
strap, and all the while making a horrible face, and 
saying, "I have eaten a whole ovcnful of rolls; but what 
use is that, when one has such a hunger as I? My 
stomach remains empty still, and I must strap myself 
to prevent my dying of hunger!" 

At these words Dummling was glad, and said, "Get 
up, and come with me, and you shall eat enough to 
satisfy you." 

He led him to the royal palace, where the King had 
collected all the meal in his whole kingdom, and had 
caused a huge mountain of bread to be baked with it. 
The man out of the wood, standing before it, began to 
eat, and in the course of the day the whole mountain 
had vanished. 

Then, for the third time, Dummling demanded his 
bride, but the King began again to make fresh excuses, 
and desired a ship which could travel both on land and 
water. 

"So soon as you return with that," said the King, 
"you shall have my daughter for your bride." 

Dummling went, as before, straight into the forest, 



102 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

and there he found the little old gray man to whom he 
had given his cake. When Dummling had said what 
he wanted, the old man gave him the vessel which could 
travel both on land and water, with these words: "Since 
I have eaten and drunk with you, I give you the ship, 
and all this I do because you were good natured." 

Now as soon as the King saw the ship he could not 
any longer keep back his daughter, and the wedding 
was celebrated, and after the King's death Dummling 
inherited the kingdom and lived for a long time con- 
tentedly with his bride. 



LITTLE BRIER ROSE 

In olden times there lived a King and Queen, who 
lamented day by day that they had no children, and 
yet never a one was bom. One day, as the Queen was 
bathing and thinking of her wishes, a Frog skipped out 
of the water, and said to her, "Your wish shall be ful- 
filled, — before a year passes you shall have a daughter." 

As the Frog had said, so it happened, and a little girl 
was born who was so beautiful that the King was almost 
beside himself with joy. He ordered a great feast to 
be held, and invited to it not only his relatives, friends, 
and acquaintances, but also all the wise women of the 
kingdom, so they might be kind and affectionate toward 
the child. There happened to be thirteen of these vnse 
women in his dominions, but since he had only twelve 
golden plates out of which they could eat, one had to 
be left at home. The f^te was celebrated with all the 
magnificence possible, and, as soon as it was over, the 
wise women presented the infant with their wonderful 
gifts; one with virtue, another with Ix^auty, a third with 
riches, and so on until the child had ever>'thing that is to 
be desired in the world. Just as the eleventh had given 
her present, the thirteenth old lady suddenly stepped in. 

She was in a tremendous passion because she had 
not been invited, and, without greeting or even looking 
at any one, she exclaimed loudly, "The Princess shall 
prick herself with a spindle on her fifteenth birthday, and 
die!" and without a word further she turned her back 
and left the hall. 

IQ3 



104 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

All were terrified, but the twelfth fairy, who had not 
yet spoken her wish, then stepped up, and because she 
could not take away the evil wish, but only soften it, 
she said, "She shall not die, but shall fall into a sleep of 
a hundred years' duration." 

The King, who naturally wished to protect his child 
from this misfortune, issued a decree commanding that 
every spindle in the kingdom should be burned. Mean- 
while all the wishes of the wise women were fulfilled, 
and the maiden became so beautiful, gentle, virtuous, and 
clever that every one who saw her fell in love with her. 

It happened on the day when she was just fifteen 
years old that the Queen and the King were not at home, 
and so she was left alone in the castle. She looked about 
in every place, going through all the rooms and chambers 
just as she pleased, until she came at last to an old tower. 
Up the narrow winding staircase she tripped until she 
arrived at a door, in the lock of which was a rusty key. 
This she turned, and the door sprang open, and there 
in the little room sat an old woman with a spindle, 
spinning flax. 

"Good day, my good old lady," said the Princess, 
"what are you doing here?" 

' ' I am spinning, ' ' said the old woman, nodding her head. 

" What thing is that which twists round so merrily?" 
inquired the Princess, and she took the spindle to try 
her hand at spinning. 

Scarcely had she done so when the prophecy was 
fulfilled, for she pricked her finger; and at the very same 
moment she fell back upon a bed which stood near, and 
lay in a deep sleep. This sleep extended over the whole 
palace. The King and Queen, who had just come in, 



LITTLE BRIER ROSE 105 

fell asleep in the hall, and all their courtiers with them — 
the horses in the stables, the doves upon the caves, the 
flics upon the walls, and even the fire upon the hearth, 
all ceased to stir — the meat which was ccx)king ceased 
to frizzle, and the cook at the instant of pulling the 
kitchen boy's hair lost his hold and began to snore too. 
The wind also fell entirely, and not a leaf rustled on the 
trees round the castle. 

Now around the palace a thick hedge of briers began 
growing, which every year grew higher and higher till 
the castle was quite hid from view, so that one could not 
sec even the flag upon the tower. 

But the story went through the land of the beautiful 
maiden Brier Rose, for so was the sleeping Princess 
named, and from time to time Princes came and tried to 
pass through the hedge into the castle; but it was not 
possible, for the thorns held them as if by hands, and 
the youths were unable to release themselves, and so 
perished miserably. 

After the lapse of many years there came another 
King's son into the country, and heard an old man tell 
the legend of the hedge of briers; how behind it stood 
a castle where slept a wonderfully beautiful Princess 
called Brier Rose, who had slumbered nearly a hundred 
years, and with her the Queen and King and all their 
court. The old man further related that he had heard 
from his grandfather that many Princes had come and 
tried to penetrate the hedge, and had died a miserable 
death. But the youth was not to be daunted, and, 
however much the old man tried to dissuade him, he 
would not listen, but said, "I fear not! I will see this 
hedge of briers!" 



io6 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

Just at that time came the last day of the hundred 
years, when Brier Rose was to wake again. As the 
young Prince approached the hedge, the thorns turned 
to fine large flowers, which of their own accord made a 
way for him to pass through, and again closed behind 
him. In the courtyard he saw the horses and dogs lying 
fast asleep, and on the eaves were the doves with their 
heads beneath their wings. As soon as he went into the 
house there were the flies asleep upon the wall, the cook 
still stood with his hands on the hair of the kitchen 
boy, the maid at the board with the unplucked fowl in 
her hand. 

He went on, and in the hall he found the courtiers 
lying asleep, and above, by the throne, were the King 
and Queen. He went on farther, and all was so quiet 
he could hear himself breathe, and at last he came to 
the tower and opened the door of the little room where 
slept Brier Rose. There she lay, looking so beautiful 
that he could not turn away his eyes, and he bent over 
her and kissed her. 

Just as he did so she awoke, opened her eyes, and 
greeted him with smiles. Then they went down together, 
and immediately the King and Queen awoke, and the 
whole court, and all stared at each other in wonder. 
Now the horses in the stable got up and shook them- 
selves, the dogs wagged their tails, the doves upon the 
eaves drew their heads from under their wings, looked 
around, and flew away, the flies upon the walls began 
to crawl, the fire to burn brightly and to cook the meat, 
the meat again began to frizzle, the cook gave his lad a 
box upon the ear which made him call out, and the maid 
began to pluck the fowl furiously. The whole palace 



LITTLE BRIER ROSE 107 

was once more in motion as if nothing had occurred, for 
the hundred years* sleep had made no change in any one. 
By and by the wedding of the Prince with Brier Rose 
was celebrated with great splendor, and to the end of 
their days they lived happy and contented. 



THE OLD WOMAN IN THE WOOD 

Once upon a time a poor Servant Girl was traveling 
with the family she served through a wood, and just as 
they got to the middle of it they found themselves 
in the power of a murdering band of robbers, who all 
at once sprang out of the brushwood and murdered 
all they found. But the girl jumped out of the cart 
in terror, and hid herself behind a tree. As soon as the 
robbers had disappeared with their booty she came 
from her hiding place, and saw her great misfortune. 
She began to cry bitterly, and said to herself: "What 
shall I do now, a poor girl like me? I cannot find my 
way out of the wood; nobody lives here, and I must 
perish with hunger." 

She looked about for a road, but could not find one; 
and when evening came she sat down under a tree, and, 
commending herself to God, determined to remain where 
she was, whatever might happen. 

She had not sat there a long while before a little 
white Pigeon came flying toward her, carrying in his 
beak a small golden key. The bird put the key into the 
girl's hand, and said, "Do you see yon great tree? Within 
it is a cupboard, which is opened with this key, and 
there you will find food enough so that you need not 
suffer hunger any longer." 

The girl went to the tree, and unlocking it, found 
pure milk in a little dish, and white bread fit to break 
into it; and of these she made a good meal. When 
she had finished she said to herself, "At home now the 

1 08 



THE OLD WOMAN IX THE WOOD 109 

cocks and hens are gone to roost, and I am so tired I 
should hke to go to bed myself." In a moment the 
Pigeon flew up, bringing another gold key in his bill, 
and said, " Do you see yon tree? Open it, and you will 
find a bed within!" She opened the little door in the 
tree, and there stood a little white bed; and, after saying 
her prayers and asking God's protection during the 
night, she went to sleep. In the morning the Pigeon 
came for the third time, bringing another key, with which 
he told the girl to open a certain tree, and there she 
would find plenty of clothes. When she did so she 
found dresses of all kinds, ornamented with gold and 
precious stones, as beautiful as any princess could desire. 
And here in this spot she dwelt for a time, while the 
Pigeon every day brought her what she needed; and 
it was a very quiet and peaceful life. 

One day, however, the Pigeon came and asked the 
girl whether she would do an act of love for him. 

"With all my heart," was her reply. 

"I wish you, then," said the Pigeon, "to come with 
me to a little cottage, and to go into it, and there on the 
hearth you will see an old Woman, who will say 'Good 
day !' But for my sake give her no answer, let her do what 
she will. But go past her right hand, and you will see a 
door which you must open. Enter the room, where upon 
a table will lie a great number of rings of all descriptions, 
and among them several with glittering stones; but leave 
them alone, and seek out a plain ring which will be there, 
and bring it to me as quickly as possible." 

The girl thereupon went to the cottage, and stepped 
in. There sat an old Woman who stared when she 
saw her, but said, "Good day, my child!" The girl 



no GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

made no answer, but went toward the door. "Whither 
are you going?" cried the old Woman. "This is my 
house, and nobody shall enter it unless I wish!" and she 
tried to detain the girl by catching hold of her dress. 
But the girl silently loosened herself, and went into the 
room, and saw upon the table the heap of rings, which 
glittered and shone before her eyes. She threw them 
aside and searched for the plain ring, but could not 
find it; and while she searched she saw the old Woman 
slip in and take up a bird cage, with which she made off. 
So the maid pursued her, and took the bird cage away 
from her, for as she looked at it she saw the ring in the 
bill of the bird which was in it. She took the ring and 
ran home, joyfully expecting the white Pigeon would 
come to take the ring, but he did not. 

So she leaned back against her tree and waited for 
the bird. Presently it seemed as if the tree were weak 
and yielding, and its branches began to droop. All at 
once the boughs bent round, and became two arms; and 
as the girl turned, the tree became a handsome man 
who embraced and kissed her, saying, "You have saved 
me out of the power of the old Woman, who is an evil 
witch. She changed me into a tree a long while ago, 
but every day I became a white pigeon for two hours. 
So long as she possessed the ring I could not regain my 
human form." 

Thereupon his servants and horses also were freed 
from the enchantment, for they likewise had been 
changed into trees; and once more they accompanied 
their master to his kingdom (for he was a King's son), 
and there he married the serving maid, and they lived 
happily ever afterward. 



THE BREMEN TOWN- MUSICIANS 

A certain man had a Donkey which had served him 
faithfully for many long years, but whose strength was 
so far gone that at last he was quite unfit for work. So 
his master began thinking how he might best save his 
keep, but the Donkey, perceiving that no good wind 
was blowing, ran away along the road to Bremen. 

"There," thought he, "I can be town-musician." 

When he had run some way he found a Hound lying 
by the roadside, gasping like one who had run till he was 
very tired. 

"What are you gasping so for, you big fellow?" asked 
the Donkey. 

"Ah," replied the Hound, "because every day I 
grow older and weaker, and cannot go any more to the 
hunt, my master wanted to put me to death. So I took 
to flight; and now I do not know how to earn my bread." 

"Well! do you know," said the Donkey, "I am going 
to Bremen to be to\\'n -musician there; suppose you go 
with me and take a share in the music. I will play on 
the lute, and you shall beat the kettledrums." The 
Dog was satisfied, and off they set. 

Presently they came to a Cat sitting in the middle of 
the path with a face like three rainy days! " Now then, 
old shaver, what has crossed you?" asked the Donkey. 

"How can one be merry when one's neck has been 
pinched like mine?" answered the Cat. "Because I 
am growing old, and my teeth are all worn to stumps, 
and because I would rather sit by the fire and spin tlian 

III 



112 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

run after mice, my mistress wanted to drown me; and 
so I ran away. But now, good advice is dear, and I do 
not know what to do." 

"Go with us to Bremen. You understand nocturnal 
music, so you can be a town-musician." 

The Cat consented, and went with them. 

The three vagabonds soon came near a farmyard, 
where upon the gate the Cock was sitting, crowing with 
all his might. 

"You crow through marrow and bone," said the 
Donkey. "Why do you do that?" 

"I was prophesying fine weather," said the Cock; 
"but, because it is the day on which Our Lady washes 
the Christ-child's little shirts, and wants to dry them, 
grand guests are coming for the Sunday, and the house- 
wife has no pity, and has told the cook to make me into 
soup for the morrow; this evening my head will be 
cut off. Now I am crowing with a full throat as long 
as I can." 

"Ah, but Red-comb," replied the Donkey, "rather 
come away with us. We are going to Bremen. You 
can find something better than death everywhere. You 
have a good voice, and if we make music together, it 
will have some quality." 

The Cock consented to this plan, and so all four 
traveled on together. They could not, however, reach 
Bremen in one day, and at evening they came into a 
forest, where they meant to pass the night. The Donkey 
and the Dog laid themselves down under a large tree, 
while the Cat and the Cock climbed up into the branches, 
but the latter flew right to the top, where he was most 
safe. Before he went to sleep, he looked all round the 




In a mnmeni Ike ftigron dev up, hnmint another ^old k*y in its 



THE BREMEN TOWN-MUSICIANS 113 

four quarters, and soon thought he saw a little spark 
in the distance, so, calling his companions, he said they 
were not far from a house, for he saw a light. 

The Donkey said: " If it is so, we had better get up 
and go farther, for the shelter here is very bad." 

"Yes, indeed!" continued the Dog. "A couple of 
bones with some meat on, also would be very acceptable! " 

So they made haste toward the spot where the light 
was, which now shone brighter and larger, until they 
came to a well-lighted robber's cottage. The Donkey, 
as the biggest, went to the window and peeped in. 

"What do you see. Gray-horse?" asked the Cock. 

"What do I see!" replied the Donkey. "A table 
laid out with savory meats and drinks, with robbers 
sitting around enjoying themselves." 

"That were the right sort of thing for us," said the 
Cock. 

"Yes, yes, I wish we were there," replied the Donkey. 
Then these animals took counsel together how they 
should contrive to drive away the robbers, and at last 
they thought of a plan. The Donkey placed his forefeet 
upon the window ledge, the Hound got upon his back, 
the Cat climbed upon the Dog, and lastly the Cock flew 
up and perched upon the head of the Cat. WTicn this 
was accomplished, at a given signal they commenced 
together to perform their music; the Donkey brayed, 
the Dog barked, the Cat mewed, and the Cock crew! 
And as they made this tremendous noise, they burst 
through the panes of the window into the room, so the 
glass shivered! Terrified at these unearthly sounds, the 
robbers sprang up in great haste, thinking nothing less 
than that some spirits had come, and fled into the 



114 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

forest. The four companions immediately sat down 
at the table and quickly ate all that was left, as if they 
had been fasting for six weeks. 

As soon as the four minstrels had finished eating, 
they put out the light, and each sought for himself a 
sleeping place according to his nature and custom. 
The Donkey laid himself down upon some straw in the 
yard, the Hound behind the door, the Cat upon the 
hearth near the warm ashes, and the Cock flew up to a 
beam on the roof. Weary with their long walk, they 
soon went to sleep. 

At midnight the robbers saw from their retreat that 
no light was burning in their house, and all appeared 
quiet. So the captain said, "We need not have been 
frightened out of our wits," and, calling one of the band, 
he sent him forward to examine the house. The messen- 
ger, finding all still, went into the kitchen to strike a 
light, and, taking the glistening, fiery eyes of the Cat 
for live coals, he held a lucifer match to them, expecting 
it to take fire. But the Cat, not understanding the joke, 
flew in his face, spitting and scratching, which frightened 
him dreadfully, so that he made for the back door; 
but the Dog, who lay there, sprang up and bit his leg; 
and 3S he ran across the yard by the straw heap, the 
Donkey gave him a powerful kick with his hind foot. 
This was not all, for the Cock, awaking at the noise, 
stretched himself, and cried from the beam, "Cock-a- 
doodle-doo, cock-a-doodle-doo!" 

Then the robber ran back as well as he could to his 
captain, and said: "Ah, my master, there dwells a hor- 
rible witch in the house, who spat on me and scratched 
my face with her long nails; and then before the door 



THE BREMEN TOWN- MUSICIANS 115 

stands a man with a knife, who stabbed at my leg; and 
in the yard there lies a black monster, who beat me with 
a great wooden club; and, besides all, upon the roof 
sits a judge, who called out, 'Bring the rogue up, do!* 
so I ran away as fast as I could." 

After this the robbers dared not go near their house 
again; but it suited the four town-musicians of Bremen 
so well that they never left it. 

And the mouth of him who last told this story is 
still warm. 



THE ELVES 

FIRST STORY 

There was once a Shoemaker, who, from no fault of 
his own, had become so poor that at last he had nothing 
left but just sufficient leather for one pair of shoes. In 
the evening he cut out the leather, intending to make 
it up in the morning; and, as he had a good conscience, 
he lay quietly down to sleep, first commending himself 
to God. In the morning he said his prayers, and then 
sat down to work; but behold, the pair of shoes was 
already made, and there they stood upon his board. 
The poor man was amazed, and knew not what to say; 
but he took the shoes into his hand to look at them 
more closely, and they were so neatly worked that 
not a stitch was done wrong; just as if they had been 
done for a prize. Presently a customer came in; and 
because the shoes pleased him very much he paid more 
than was usual, and so much that the Shoemaker was 
able to buy with it leather for two pairs of shoes. By 
evening he had got his leather shaped out; and when he 
arose the next morning he prepared to work with fresh 
spirit; but there was no need, — for the shoes stood 
all perfect on his board. He did not want for customers 
either; for two came who paid him so liberally for the 
shoes that he bought with the money material for four 
pairs more. These also, when he awoke, he found all 
ready made, and so it continued; what he cut out over- 
night was, in the morning, turned into the neatest shoes 

Ii6 



THE EL\^S 117 

possible. This went on until he had regained his former 
position, and was a prosperous man. 

One evening, not long before Christmas, when he 
had cut out the usual quantity he said to his wife, before 
going to bed, "What say you to staying up this night, 
to see who it is that helps us so kindly?" His wife was 
willing, and fastened up a light; and then they hid them- 
selves in a comer of the room, where hung some clothes 
which concealed them. As soon as it was midnight in 
came two little manikins, who squatted down on the 
board; and, taking up the prepared work, set to with 
their little fingers, stitching, and sewing, and hammering 
so swiftly and lightly that the Shoemaker could not 
take his eyes off them for astonishment. They did not 
cease until all was brought to an end, and the shoes stood 
ready on the tabic; and then they sprang quickly away. 

The following morning the wife said: "The little 
men have made us rich, and we must show our gratitude 
to them. Although they run about, they must be cold, 
for they have nothing on their bodies. I will make a 
little shirt, coat, waistcoat, and trousers, and knit some 
stockings for each, and do you make a pair of shoes 
for each." 

The husband assented; and one evening, when all 
was ready, instead of the usual work they laid the 
presents on the board, and hid themselves to see the 
result. 

At midnight in came the Elves, jumping about and 
eager to go to work; but when they saw no leather, but 
the natty little clothes, they were at first astonished, but 
soon showed their rapturous glee. They quickly drew 
on their coats, and, smoothing them down, sang: 



ii8 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

"Smart and natty boys are we; 
Shoemakers we'll no longer be"; 

and so they went on hopping and jumping over the stools 
and chairs, and at last out of the door. After that 
evening they did not come again; but the Shoemaker 
prospered in all he undertook, and lived happily to the 
end of his days. 

SECOND STORY 

Once upon a time there was a poor servant girl, who 
was both industrious and clean. Every day she dusted 
the house and shook out the sweepings on a great heap 
before the door. One morning, just as she was going 
to throw away the sweepings, she saw a letter lying 
on the heap, and, as she could not read, she put her 
broom by in a comer, and took the letter to her master 
and mistress. It contained an invitation from the 
Elves, asking the girl to stand godmother to one of their 
children. The girl did not know what to do, but at last, 
after much persuasion, she consented, for they told her 
it was not right to refuse such an invitation. So there 
came three Elves, who conducted her to a hollow moun- 
tain where they lived. Everything was very small, 
of course, but all more neat and elegant than I can tell 
you. The mother lay in a bed of ebony studded with 
pearls, and the coverings were all wrought with gold; 
the cradle was made of ivory, and the bath was of gold. 
The girl stood godmother, and afterwards wished to 
return home, but the little Elves pressed her earnestly 
to stay three days longer. So she remained, passing 
the time in pleasure and play, and the Elves behaved 
very kindly to her. At the end of the time she prepared 



THE ELVES 119 

to return home, but first they filled her pockets full of 
gold, and then led her out of the hill. As soon as she 
reached the house she took the broom, which still stood 
in the comer, and went on with her sweeping; but pres- 
ently out of the house came some strange people, who 
asked her who she was and what she was doing there. 
Then she found out that it was not three days, as she had 
supposed, but seven years that she had passed with the 
little Elves in the hill, and that her former master had 
died in her absence. 

THIRD STORY 

The little Elves once stole a child out of its cradle 
and put in its place a changeling with a clumsy head 
and staring eyes, who would do nothing but eat and 
drink. The mother, in great trouble, went to a neighbor 
to ask her advice. The neighbor told her to carry the 
changeling into the kitchen, set it on the hearth, and 
boil water in two eggshells. If the changeling was made 
to laugh, then all was over with it. The woman did all 
the neighbor said, and as she set the eggshells over the 
fire the creature sang out: 

" Thouj^h I am as old as the oldest tree. 
Cooking in an eggshell never did I see"; 

and then it burst into a hoarse laugh. WTiile it was 
laughing a nimiber of little Elves entered, bringing the 
real child, whom they placed on the hearth, and then 
they took away the changeling with them. 



KING THRUSHBEARD 

A certain King had a daughter who was beautiful 
above all belief, but withal so proud and haughty that 
no suitor was good enough for her, and she not only 
sent away every one who came but made fun of them 
as well. Once the King proclaimed a great festival, 
and invited thereto from far and near all the marriage- 
able young men. When they arrived they were all 
set in a row, according to their rank and standing; first 
the Kings, then the Grand Dukes, then the Princes, the 
Earls, the Barons, and last of all the Gentry. Then the 
King's daughter was led down the rows, but she found 
something to ridicule in all. One was too fat. "The 
winetub!" said she. Another was too tall. "Long and 
thin has little in," she remarked. A third was too short 
and fat. "Short and thick is never quick," she said. 
A fourth was too pale. "Like death himself," was her 
remark; and a fifth, who had a great deal of color, she 
called "a fighting cock." The sixth was not straight 
enough, and him she called "a green log dried behind 
the stove!" And so she went on, nicknaming every 
one of the suitors, but she made particularly merry 
with a good young King whose chin had grown rather 
crooked. "Ha, ha!" laughed she, "he has a chin like a 
thrush's beak," and after that day he went by the name 
of Thrushbeard. 

The old King, however, when he saw that his daughter 
did nothing but mock at and make sport of all the suitors 
who were collected, became very angry, and swore that 

ISO 



KING THRUSHBEARD 121 

she should take for a husband the first beggar who came 
to the gate. 

A few days after this a fiddler came beneath the 
windows to sing and cam some bounty if he could. As 
soon as the King heard him he ordered him to be called 
up. Presently he came into the room in all his dirty, 
ragged clothes, and sang before the King and Princess, 
and when he had finished he begged for a slight recom- 
pense. The King siiid, "Thy song has pleased me so 
much that I will give thee my daughter for a wife." 

The Princess was terribly frightened, but the King 
said, "I have taken an oath that I will give you to the 
first Ix'ggar, and I mean to keep it." All her remon- 
strances were in vain; the priest was called, and the 
Princess was married to the fiddler. When the ceremony 
had been performed, the King said, "Now it is not proper 
for you, a beggar woman, to stay here with your husband, 
in my house. No! you must travel about the country 
v^nth him." 

So the bcggarman led her away with him, and she 
was forced to trudge along with him on foot. As they 
came to a large forest she asked : 

"To whom belongs this beautiful wood?" 

The beggar replied: 

" King Thrushbeard the good! 
Had you taken him, so was it thine." 

"Ah, silly," said she, 

" What a lot had been mine 
Had I happily married King Thrushbeard!" 

Next they came to a meadow, and she asked: 
"To whom belongs this meadow so green.'" 



122 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

"To King Thrushbeard," was again the reply. 
"Ah, silly," said she, 

" What a lot had been mine 
Had I happily married King Thrushbeard!" 

Then they came to a great city, and she asked: 

" To whom does this beautiful town belong ?" 

"To King Thrushbeard," said one. 
"Ah, silly. 

What a lot had been mine 

Had I happily married King Thrushbeard!" 

"Come," broke in the fiddler, "it does not please me, 
I can tell you, to have you always wishing for another 
husband. Am I not good enough for you?" 

By and by they came to a very small hut, and she 
said, "Ah, heavens, to whom can this miserable, wretched 
hovel belong?" 

The fiddler replied, "That is my house and yours, 
where we shall live together." 

The Princess was obliged to stoop to get in at the door, 
and when they were inside she asked, "Where are the 
servants?" 

"What, servants!" exclaimed her husband. "You 
yourself must do all that you want done. Nov/ make 
a fire and put on some water, that you may cook my 
dinner, for I am quite tired." 

The Princess, however, understood nothing about 
making fires or cooking, and the beggar had to set to 
work himself. As soon as they had finished their scanty 
meal they went to bed. In the morning the husband 
woke his wife very early, that she might set the house 



KING THRUSHBEARD 123 

to rights, and for a couple of days they lived on in this 
way, and made an end of their store. 

Then the husband said: "Wife, we must not go 
on this way any longer, stopping here, doing nothing: 
you must weave some baskets." So he went out and 
cut some osiers and brought them home, but when his 
wife attempted to bend them the hard twigs wounded 
her hands and made them bleed. 

"I see that won't do," said the fiddler. "You had 
better spin. Perhaps you can do that better." 

So she sat down to spin, but the harsh thread cut her 
tender fmgcrs very badly, so that the blood flowed freely. 
"Do you see," said the husband, "how >t)u are spoiling 
your work? I made a bad bargain in taking you ! Now 
I must try and make a business in pots and earthen 
vessels: you shall sit in the market and sell them." 

"Oh, if anybody out of my father's dominions should 
come and see me in the market selling earthenware," 
thought the Princess to herself, "how they would laugh 
at me!" 

However, all her excuses were in vain; she must 
either sell earthenware or die of hunger. 

The first time all went well, for the people bought 
of the Princess because she was so pretty, and not only 
gave her what she asked but some even laid doT^Ti their 
money and left the pots behind. On her earnings for 
this day they lived as long as they lasted; and then 
the husband purchased a second stock of pots. With 
these she placed her stall at a comer of the market, 
offering them for sale. All at once a drunken hussar 
came plunging down the street on his horse, and rode 
right into the midst of her earthenware, and shattered 



124 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

it into a thousand pieces. The accident, as well it might, 
set her a-weeping, and in her trouble, not knowing 
what to do, she ran home, crying, "Ah, what will become 
of me? What will my good man say?" 

When she had told her husband he cried out, "Who- 
ever would have thought of sitting at the corner of the 
market to sell earthenware? But well, I see you are not 
accustomed to any ordinary work. There, leave off 
crying; I have been to the King's palace, and asked 
if they were not in want of a kitchen maid, and they 
have agreed to take you, and there you will live free 
of cost." 

Now the Princess became a kitchen maid, and was 
obliged to do as the cook bade her, and wash up the 
dirty things. She put a jar into each of her pockets, 
and in them she took home what fell to her share of the 
leavings, and of these she and her husband made their 
meals. 

Not many days afterwards it happened that the wed- 
ding of the King's eldest son was to be celebrated, and 
the poor wife placed herself near the door of the hall 
to look on. As the candles were lit and guests more 
and more beautiful entered the room, all dressed most 
simiptuously, she thought of her fate with a sad heart, 
and repented of the pride and haughtiness which had 
so humiliated and impoverished her. Every now and 
then the servants threw her morsels of rich delicacies 
from the dishes they carried in, and these pieces she put 
into her pockets to carry home. 

Presently a King entered, clothed in silk and vel- 
vet and having golden chains round his neck. As soon 
as he saw the beautiful woman standing at the door 



KING THRUSHBEARD 125 

he seized her by the hand to dance with her, but she, 
terribly frightened, refused; for she saw it was King 
Thrushbeard, who had wooed her and whom she had 
laughed at. 

Her struggles were of no avail; he drew her into the 
ballroom, and there tore the band to which her pockets 
were hung so that the pots fell down and the soup ran 
over the floor, while the scraps skipped about in all 
directions. When the fine folk saw this sight they burst 
into one general shout of laughter and derision, and the 
poor girl was so ashamed that she wished herself a 
thousand fathoms below the earth. 

She ran out through the door and would have escaped ; 
but on the steps she met a man who took her back, and 
when she looked at him, lo! it was King Thrushbeard 
again. 

He spoke kindly to her, and said, "Be not afraid; I 
and the fiddler who dwelt with you in the wretched hut 
are one. For love of you I have disguised myself; and 
I was also the hussar who rode in among the pots. All 
this I have done to humble your haughty spirit, and to 
punish you for the pride which led you to mock me.'* 

At these words she wept bitterly, and said, " I am not 
worthy to be your wife, I have done you so great a wrong." 
But he replied, "Those evil days are passed: we will 
now celebrate our marriage." 

Immediately after the maids-in-waiting came and 
put on her the most magnificent dresses; and then her 
father and his whole court arrived, and wished her happi- 
ness on her wedding day. And now commenced her 
true joy as Queen of the country of King Thrushbeard. 

I wish you and I had been there too. 



THUMBLING 

Once upon a time there lived a poor peasant, who 
used to sit every evening by the hearth, poking the fire, 
while his wife spun. One night he said, "How sad it is 
that we have no children! Everything is so quiet here, 
while in other houses it is so noisy and merry." 

"Ah!" sighed his wife, "if we had only one, and he 
no bigger than my thumb, I should still be content, and 
love him with all my heart." 

A little while after the wife fell ill; and after seven 
months a child was born, who, although he was perfectly 
formed in all his limbs, actually was not bigger than one's 
thumb. So they said to one another that it had hap- 
pened just as they wished; and they called the child 
"Thumbling." 

Every day they gave him all the food he could eat ; still 
he did not grow a bit, but remained exactly the height he 
was when first bom; he looked about him, however, very 
knowingly, and showed himself to be a wise and nimble 
fellow, who prospered in everything he undertook. 

One morning the peasant was making ready to go 
into the forest to cut wood, and said, "Now I wish I had 
some one who could follow me with the cart." 

"Oh! father," exclaimed ThumbHng, "I will bring 
the cart. Don't you trouble yourself; it shall be there 
at the right time." 

The father laughed at this speech, and said, "How 
shall that be? You are much too small to lead the horse 
by the bridle." 

126 



THUMBLIXG 127 

"That matters not, father. If mother will harness the 
horst', I can sit in his ear, and tell him which way to take." 

"Well, for once wc will try," said the father; and 
so, when the hour came, the mother harnessed the horse, 
and placed Thumbling in its ear, and he cried, "Gee up! 
Gee up!" Then he set out quite like a man, and the 
cart went on the right road to the forest. Just as 
Thumbling turned a comer, and called out, "Gee up," 
two strange men came toward him; and one said to 
the other, "My goodness, what is this? Here comes a 
cart, and the driver keeps calling to the horse; but 
I can see no one." 

"That cannot be right," said the other. "Let us 
follow and see where the cart stops." 

The cart went on safely deep into the forest, and 
straight to the place where the wood was cut. As soon 
as Thiunbling saw his father, he called to him, "Here, 
father; here I am, you see, with the cart. Just take me 
down." 

The peasant caught the bridle of the horse with his 
left hand, and with his right took his little son out of 
its ear, and he sat himself down merrily on a straw. 

When the two strangers saw the little fellow they knew 
not what to say for astonishment. Then one of them 
took his companion aside, and said, "This little fellow 
might make our fortune if we could exhibit him in the 
towns. Let us buy him." 

So they went up to the peasant, and asked, "Will you 
sell your son? We will treat him well." 

"No," replied the man; "he is my heart's delight, 
not to be bought for all the money in the world!" 

But Thumbling, when he heard what was said, 



128 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

climbed up by his father's coat, and set himself on his 
shoulder, and whispered in his ear, "Let me go now, and 
I will soon come back again." 

So his father gave him to the two men for a fine 
piece of gold; and they asked him where he would sit. 

"Oh," replied he, "put me on the rim of your hat; 
and then I can walk round and survey the coimtry. I 
will not fall off." 

They did as he wished ; and when he had taken leave 
of his father, they set out. 

Just as it was getting dark he asked to be lifted down ; 
and, after some demur, the man on whose hat he was, 
took him off and placed him on the ground. In an 
instant Thumbling ran off, and slipped into a mouse 
hole, where they could not see him. "Good evening, 
masters," said he, "you can go home without me"; and 
with a quiet laugh he crept farther into his hole. 

The two men poked their sticks into the hole, but 
all in vain; for Thumbling only went down farther 
still; and when it had grown quite dark they were 
obliged to return home full of vexation and with empty 
pockets. 

As soon as Thumbling saw that they had gone, he 
crawled out of his hiding place, and said, "How dan- 
gerous it is to walk in this field in the dark : one might 
soon break one's head or legs." And so saying he 
looked round, and by great good luck saw an empty 
snail shell. "God be praised," he exclaimed, "here I can 
sleep securely"; and in he went. 

Just as he was about to fall asleep he heard two men 
coming by, one of whom said to the other, "How shall 
we manage to get at the. parson's gold and silver?" 



THUMBLING 129 

"That I can tell you," interrupted Thumbling. 

"WTiat was that?" exclaimed the thief, frightened. 
**I heard some one speak." 

They stood still and listened; and then Thumbling 
said, "Take me with you, and I will help you." 

"WTicre are you?" asked the thieves. 

"Search on the ground, and mark where my voice 
comes from," replied he. The thief looked about, and 
at last found Thumbling, and lifted him up in the air. 

"What, will you help us, you little wight?" said they. 

"A great deal. I can creep between the iron bars 
into the chamber of the parson, and reach out to you 
whatever you require." 

"Very well ; we will see what you can do," said the thief. 

\Mien they came to the house Thumbling crept into 
the chamber, and cried out with all his might, "Will 
you have all that is here?" 

The thieves were terrified, and said, "Speak gently, 
or some one will awake." 

But Thumbling feigned not to understand, and 
exclaimed, louder still, "Will you have all that is here?" 

This awoke the cook, who slept in the next room, 
and sitting up in her bed she listened. The thieves, 
however, in their fright had run back a little way; but 
at last, taking courage again, and thinking the little 
fellow wished to tease them, they came and whispered 
to him to make haste and hand them out something. 

At this, Thumbhng cried out still more loudly, "I 
will give you it all, only put your hands in." 

The listening maid heard this clearly, and springing 
out of bed, hurried to the door. The thieves ran off as 
if they were pursued by the Wild Huntsman, but the 



I30 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

maid, as she could see nothing, went to strike a light. 
When she returned Thumbhng escaped into the barn 
without being seen, and the maid, after she had looked 
round and searched in every comer, without finding 
anything, went to bed again, believing she had been 
dreaming with her eyes open. Meanwhile Thumbling 
had crept in among the hay, and found a beautiful place 
to sleep, where he intended to rest till daybreak, and 
then to go home to his parents. 

Other things, however, was he to experience, for there 
is much tribulation and trouble going on in this world. 

The maid got up at dawn of day to feed the cows. 
Her first walk was to the barn, where she took an armful 
of hay, and just the bundle in which poor Thumbling 
lay asleep. He slept so soundly, however, that he was 
not aware of the change, and only awoke when he was 
in the cow's mouth. 

"Ah, goodness!" exclaimed he, "however came I 
into this mill?" but soon he saw where he really was. 

Then he took care not to come between the teeth, 
and presently slipped quite down the cow's throat. 
"In this little room the windows are forgotten," said he 
to himself, "and no sun shines in; neither will a candle 
be brought." 

His quarters were especially unpleasing to him, 
and, more than all, he felt his room growing narrower, 
as the cow swallowed more hay. So he began to call 
out in terror, as loudly as he could, "Bring me no more 
food. I do not want any more food!" 

Now the maid was just milking the cow, and when 
she heard the voice without seeing anything, and knew 
it was the same she had heard in the night, she was so 



THUMBLING 131 

frightened that she shpped off her stool and overturned 
the milk. In great haste she ran to her master, saying, 
"Oh, Mr. Parson, the cow has been speaking." 

"You are crazy," he replied; but still he went him- 
self into the stable to see what was the matter, and 
scarcely had he stepped in when Thumbling began to 
shout out again, "Bring me no more food, bring me no 
more food." 

This terrified the parson himself, and he thought an 
evil spirit had entered his cow, and so ordered her to be 
killed. As soon as that was done, they began dividing 
the carcass, but the stomach in which Thumbling was, 
was thrown on the midden. And now a fresh accident 
befell Thumbling, for a wolf, who was passing at the time, 
made a snatch at the stomach, and swallowed it at one 
gulp. However, Thumbling did not lose courage, but as 
soon as the W(jlf had swallowed him he called out from 
inside, "Oh, Mr. Wolf, I know of a capital meal for you." 

"Where is it to be found?" asked the wolf. 

"In the house by the meadow. You must creep 
through the kitchen sink, and there you will find cakes, 
and bacon, and sausages, as many as you can eat," 
replied Thumbling, describing exactly his father's house. 

The Wolf did not wait to be told twice, but in the 
night crept in, and ate a\vay in the larder to his heart's 
content. When he had finished, he tried to escape by 
the way he had entered, but the hole was not large 
enough. Thereupon Thumbling, who had reckoned on 
this, began to make a tremendous noise inside the poor 
Wolf, screaming and shouting as loudly as he could. 

"Will you be quiet?" said the wolf. "You will 
awaken the people." 



132 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

"Eh, what!" cried the Httle man, "since you have 
satisfied yourself, it is my turn now to make merry"; 
and he set up a louder howling than before. At last 
his father and mother awoke, and came to the room and 
looked through the chinks of the door. As soon as they 
saw the Wolf they ran away and the man brought his 
ax and the woman a scythe. 

"Stop you behind," said the man, as they entered 
the room; "if my blow does not kill him, you must give 
him a cut with your scythe, and chop off his head." 

When Thumbling heard his father's voice, he called 
out, "Father dear, I am here, in the wolf's body!" 

"Heaven be praised!" said the man, full of joy. "Our 
dear child is found again!" And be bade his wife take 
away the scythe, lest it should do some harm to his son. 

Then he raised his ax, and gave the wolf such a blow 
on its head that it fell dead, and, taking a knife, he cut 
the body open and released the little fellow, his son. 

"Ah," said his father, "what sorrow we have had 
about you." 

"Yes, father," replied Thumbling; "I have been 
traveling a great deal about the world. Heaven be 
praised! I breathe fresh air again." 

"Where have you been, my son?" inquired his father. 

"Once I was in a mouse's hole, once inside a cow, 
and last inside that wolf; and now I will stay here with 
you," said Thumbling. 

"Yes," said the old people, "we will not sell you 
again, for all the riches of the world" ; and they embraced 
and kissed him with great affection. Then they gave 
him plenty to eat and drink, and had new clothes made 
for him, for his old ones were worn out with traveling. 



FAITHFUL JOHN 

Once upon a time there lived an old King, who fell 
very sick, and thought he was lying upon his deathbed; 
so he said, "Let Faithful John come to me." Faithful 
John was his favorite servant, and was so called because 
he had been true to the King all his lifetime. 

As soon as John came to the bedside, the King said: 
"My faithful John, I feel that my end approaches, and 
I have no other care than about my son, who is still so 
young that he cannot always guide himself aright. If 
you do not promise to instruct him in everything he 
ought to know, and to be his guardian, I cannot close 
mine eyes in peace." 

Then Faithful John answered, "I \\'ill never leave 
him; I will always serve him truly, even if it cost me 
my life." 

So the old King was comforted, and said: "Now I 
can die in peace. After my death you must show him 
all the chambers, halls, and vaults in the castle, and 
all the treasures which are in them; but the last room 
in the long corridor you must not show him, for in it 
hangs the portrait of the daughter of the King of the 
Golden Palace. If he sees her picture he will conceive 
a great love for her, and will fall down in a swoon, and 
on her account undergo great perils. Therefore you 
must keep him away." 

Faithful John pressed his master's hand again in 
token of assent, and soon after the King laid his head 
upon the pillow, and expired. 

«i3 



134 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

After the old King had been laid in his grave Faith- 
ful John told the young King all that his father had said 
upon his deathbed, and declared, "All this I will cer- 
tainly fulfill; I will be as true to you as I was to him, 
if it cost me my life." 

When the time of mourning was passed, Faithful 
John said to the young King, "It is now time for you to 
see your inheritance; I will show you yoiu* paternal 
castle." So he led the King all over it, upstairs and 
downstairs, and showed him all the riches, and all the 
splendid chambers; only one room he did not show, 
containing the perilous portrait, for the picture was so 
placed that one saw it directly the door was opened, and, 
moreover, it was so beautifully painted one thought 
it breathed and moved; nothing in all the world could 
be more lifelike or more beautiful. 

The young King noticed, however, that Faithful 
John always passed one door, so he asked, "Why do you 
not open that one?" 

"There is something in it," replied Faithful John, 
"which will frighten you." 

But the King said, "I have seen all the other rooms 
of the castle, and I will know what is in there"; and he 
went and tried to open the door by force. Faithful 
John pulled him back, and said, "I promised your father 
before he died that you should not see the contents of 
that room. It would bring great misfortunes upon 
both you and me." 

"Oh, no," replied the young King; "if I do not go in, 
it will be my certain ruin. I should have no peace night 
nor day until I had seen it with my own eyes. Now I 
will not stir from the place until you unlock the door." 



FAITHFUL JOHN 135 

Then Faithful John saw that talking was of no use, 
so, with a heavy heart and many sighs, he picked the 
key out of the great bunch. When he had opened the 
door he went in first, thinking that by standing before 
the King he would cover up the picture so the King 
could not see it. But it was of no use, for the King 
stood upon tiptoes and looked over his shoulder. As 
soon as he saw the portrait of the beautiful maiden, 
glittering with precious stones, he fell down on the ground 
insensible. 

Faithful John lifted him up and carried him to his 
bed, and thought with great concern, "Mercy on us! 
the misfortune has happened. What will come of it?" 
and he gave the young King wine until he came to 
himself. 

The first words he spoke were, "Ah, who is that 
beautiful maiden in the picture?" 

"That is the daughter of the King of the Golden 
Palace," was the reply. 

"Then," said the King, "my love for her is so great 
that if all the leaves on all the trees were tongues they 
could not declare it; I shall devote my life to winning 
her. You are my faithful John. You must help me." 

The trusty servant deliberated for a long while how 
to set about this business, for it was very difficult even 
to obtain a sight of the King's daughter. At last he 
bethought himself of a way, and said to the King: 
"Ever^'thing that she has around her is of gold, — chairs, 
tables, dishes, bowls, and all the household utensils. 
Among your treasures are five tons of gold; let one of 
the goldsmiths of your kingdom manufacture vessels 
and utensils of all kinds therefrom — all kinds of birds, 



136 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

and wild and wonderful beasts, such as will please her; 
then we will travel with these and try our luck." 

So the King summoned all his goldsmiths, who worked 
day and night until many very beautiful things were 
ready. When all had been placed on board a ship 
Faithful John put on merchant's clothes, and the King 
likewise, so that they might travel quite imknown. 
Then they sailed over the wide sea, and sailed away 
until they came to the city where dwelt the daughter 
of the King of the Golden Palace. 

Faithful John told the King to remain in the ship and 
wait for him. "Perhaps," said he, "I shall bring the 
King's daughter with me. Therefore take care that 
all is in order, and set out the golden vessels and adorn 
the whole ship." Thereupon he placed in his apron 
some of the golden cups, stepped upon land, and went 
straight to the King's palace. When he came into 
the castle yard a beautiful maid stood by the well. She 
had two golden pails in her hand, drawing water; and 
when she had filled them, and had turned around, she 
saw a strange man, and asked who he was. 

Then Faithful John answered, "I am a merchant," 
and opening his apron, he showed her its contents. 

"Oh, what beautiful golden things!" she exclaimed, 
and setting the pails down she looked at the cups one 
after another, and said, "The King's daughter must 
see these. She is so pleased with anything made of 
gold that she will buy them all." And taking him by 
the hand she led him in, for she was the waiting maid. 

When the King's daughter saw the golden cups she 
was much pleased, and said, "They are so finely worked 
that I will purchase them all." 



FAITHFUL JOHN 137 

But Faithful John rcpHcd: "I am only the servant 
of a rich merchant. What I have here is nothing in 
comparison with those my master has in his ship, than 
which nothing more delicate or costly has ever been 
worked in gold." 

Then the King's daughter wished to have them all 
brought, but he said, "It would take many days, and 
so great is the quantity that your palace has not halls 
enough in it to place them around." 

Then her curiosity and desire were still more excited, 
and at last she said, "Take me to the ship; I will go 
myself and look at your master's treasiu-e." 

Faithful John conducted her to the ship with great 
joy, and the King, when he beheld her, saw that her 
beauty was even greater than the picture had repre- 
sented, and thought nothing else but that his heart 
would burst in twain. 

Presently she stepped on board, and the King con- 
ducted her below; but Faithful John remained on deck 
by the steersman, and told him to unmoor the ship and 
put on all the sail he could, that it might fly as a bird 
in the air. Meanwhile the King showed the Princess 
all the golden treasures, — the dishes, cups, and bowls, 
the birds, the wild and wonderful beasts. Many hours 
passed away while she looked at everything, and in her 
pleasure she did not notice that the ship sailed on and 
on. As soon as she had looked at the last thing, and 
thanked the merchant, she wished to depart. But when 
she came on deck she saw that they were upon the high 
sea, far from the shore, and were hastening on with 
all sail. 

"Ah!" she exclaimed in affright. "I am betrayed! I 



138 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

am carried off and taken away in the power of a strange 
merchant. I would rather die!" 

But the King, taking her by the hand, said, "I am 
not a merchant, but a king, thine equal in birth. It 
is true that I have carried thee off, but that is because 
of my overwhelming love for thee. Dost thou know 
that when I first looked on thy portrait and saw thy 
beauteous face I fell down in a swoon before it?" 

When the King's daughter heard these words she 
was reassured, and her heart was inclined toward him, 
so that she willingly consented to become his bride. 
While they thus went on their voyage on the high sea 
it happened that Faithful John, as he sat on the deck of 
the ship making music, saw three ravens in the air, 
which came flying toward them. He stopped playing 
and listened to what they were saying to each other, for 
he understood them perfectly. 

The first one exclaimed, "There he is, carrying home 
the daughter of the King of the Golden Palace." 

"But he is not home yet," replied the second. 

"But he hasher," said the third; "she is sitting by 
his side in the ship." 

Then the first began again and exclaimed, "What 
matters that? When they go on shore, a fox-colored 
horse will spring toward him, on which he will mount; 
and as soon as he is mounted, it will rise up into the air 
with him so that he will never again see his bride." 

The second one said, "Is there no escape?" 

"Oh, yes, if another gets on quickly and takes out 
the pistol which is in the holster, and shoots the horse 
dead, the young King will be saved. But who knows 
that? And if any one does know it, and tells him, such 



FAITHFUL JOHN 139 

an one will be turned to stone from the toe to the knee." 
Then the second spake again: "I know still more. 
If the horse should be killed, the young King will not 
then retain his bride; for when they come into the castle 
a beautiful bridal shirt will lie there upon a dish, and 
seem to be woven of gold and silver, but it is nothing 
but sulphur and pitch, and if he puts it on, it will burn 
him to his marrow and bones." 

Then the third raven asked, "Is there no escape?" 
"Oh, yes," answered the second, "if some one ^\nth 
his gloves on takes up the shirt and throws it into the 
fire so that it is burned, the young King will be saved. 
But what does that avail? Whoever knows it and tells 
him will be turned to stone from his knee to his heart." 
Then the third raven spoke: "I know still more. 
Even if the bridal shirt be consumed, the young King 
will not retain his bride. For after the wedding a 
dance will be held, and while the young Queen is dancing 
she will suddenly turn pale, and fall down as if dead; 
and if some one does not raise her up, and take three 
drops of blood from her right breast and spit them out 
again, vshc will die. But whoever knows that and tells 
it will have his whole body turned to stone, from the 
crown of his head to the toe of his foot." 

After the ravens had thus talked with one another, 
they flew away, and the trusty John, who had perfectly 
understood all they had said, was from that time very 
cjuiet and sad ; for if he concealed from his master what 
he had heard, misfortune would happen to him, and if 
he told him all he must give up his own life. But at 
last he thought, "I will save my master, even if I destroy 
myself." 



140 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

As soon as they came on shore all happened just as 
the ravens had foretold, and an immense fox-red horse 
sprang up. 

"Good!" said the King; "this shall carry me to my 
castle," and he tried to mount; but Faithful John came 
up before him, and swinging himself on quickly, drew 
the pistol out of the holster and shot the horse dead. 

Then the other servants of the King, who after all 
were not very fond of Faithful John, exclaimed, "How 
shameful to kill the beautiful animal, which might have 
borne the King to the castle!" 

But the King replied, "Be silent, and let him go; he 
is my very faithful John — who knows the good he may 
have done?" 

Now they went into the castle, and there in the hall 
stood a dish, and the splendid bridal shirt lay in it, and 
seemed nothing else than gold and silver. The young 
King went toward it and was about to take it up, when 
Faithful John pushed him away, and, seizing it with 
his gloves on, bore it quickly to the fire and burned it. 

The other servants thereupon began to murmur, 
saying, "See, now he is burning the King's bridal shirt!" 

But the young King replied, "Who knows what good 
he has done? Let him alone — he is my faithful John." 

Soon after, the wedding was celebrated, and a grand 
ball was given, and the bride began to dance. Faithful 
John paid great attention, and watched her face; all 
at once she grew pale, and fell to the ground as if dead. 
Then he sprang up hastily, raised her up and bore her 
to a chamber, where he laid her down, knelt beside her, 
and, drawing the three drops of blood from her right 
breast, spit them out. At once she breathed again. 



FAITHFUL JOHN 141 

and raised herself up; but the young King had seen 
everything and, not knowing why Faithful John had 
done this, was very angry, and cried, "Throw him into 
the dungeon!" 

The next morning the trusty John was brought up 
for trial, and led to the gallows; and as he stood upon 
them, and was about to be executed, he said, "Every 
one condemned to die may once before his death speak. 
Shall I also have that privilege?" 

"Yes," answered the King, "it shall be granted to you." 

Then Faithful John said, "I have been unrighteously 
judged, and have always been true to you." Then he 
related the conversation of the ravens which he heard 
at sea; and how, in order to save his master, he was 
obliged to do all he had done. 

Then the King cried out, "Oh, my most trusty John, 
pardon, pardon! Lead him away!" 

But Faithful John had fallen down at the last word, 
and was turned into stone. 

At this both the King and the Queen were in great 
grief, and the King exclaimed, "Ah, how wickedly have 
I rewarded his great fidelity!" and he had the stone 
statue placed in his sleeping chamber, near his bed; and 
as often as he looked at it he wept and said, "Ah, could 
I bring you back to life again, my faithful John!" 

After some time had passed, the Queen bore tw*ins, 
two little sons, who were her great joy. Once, when 
the Queen was in church and the two children at home 
playing by their father's side, the King, full of sorrow, 
looked up at the stone statue, and said with a sigh, 
"Ah, could I restore you to life, my faithful John!" 

At these words the stone began to speak, saying. 



142 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

"You can make me live again if you will bestow on me 
that which is dearest to you." 

The King replied, "All that I have in the world I will 
give up for you." 

The stone spoke again: "If you, with your own hand, 
cut off the heads of both your children and sprinkle me 
with their blood, I shall be brought to life again." 

The King was terrified when he heard that he him- 
self must kill his two dear children; but he remembered 
his servant's great fidelity, and how Faithful John had 
died for him, so drawing his sword he cut off the heads 
of both his children with his own hand. And as soon 
as he had sprinkled the stone with blood the life came 
back to it, and the trusty John again stood alive and 
well before him. 

"Your faith shall not go unrewarded," he said to 
the King, and taking the heads of the two children he 
set them on again, and anointed their wounds with 
their blood. Thereupon they healed in a moment, and 
the children sprang away and played as if nothing had 
happened. 

Now the King was full of happiness, and as soon as 
he saw the Queen coming he hid Faithful John and both 
the children in a great cupboard. 

As soon as she came in he said to her, "Have you 
prayed in the church?" 

"Yes," she answered; "but I thought continually 
of Faithful John, who has come to such misfortune 
through us." 

Then he replied, "My dear wife, we can restore his 
life to him, but it will cost us both our little sons, whom 
we must sacrifice." 



FAITHFUL JOHN 143 

The Queen became pale and was terrified at heart, 
but she said, "We owe it to him because of his great 
fidehty." 

Then the King was very glad that she thought as he 
did, and going to the cupboard he unlocked it, and 
brought out the children and Faithful John, saying, 
"God be praised! he is saved, and we have still our 
little sons"; and then he told her all that had happened. 
AftervN-ards they lived happily together to the end of 
their days. 



THE IRON STOVE 

In the days when wishing was having, a certain King's 
son was enchanted by an old Witch, and obHged to sit 
in a great iron stove which stood in the wood! There 
he passed many years, for nobody could release him. 
Then one day a Princess who had lost herself, and could 
not find her way back to her father's kingdom, came 
at last, after nine days' wandering, to the spot where 
the iron stove stood. As she approached it, she heard 
a voice say, "Whence comest thou, and whither goest 
thou?" 

"I have lost the road to my father's kingdom, and 
I am unable to find my home!" she replied. 

"I will help you, and that in a short time," said the 
voice from the iron stove, "if you consent to do what 
I desire; I am the son of a far greater King than your 
father, and am willing to marry you." 

The Princess was frightened at this proposal, and 
thought, "What can I do with an iron stove?" But 
nevertheless, as she was anxious to get home, she con- 
sented to do what he should wish. Then the Prince 
told her that after she had reached home she must 
return and bring with her a knife to cut a hole in the 
stove. Then he gave her a companion, who walked 
near her but did not speak, and in two hours he brought 
her to her father's palace. There was great joy there 
when the Princess returned, and the old King fell on. 
her neck and kissed her; but she was sore troubled, 
and said, "Alas! my dear father, how I have suffered! 

»44 




7r;:7st. J ..r uf,.nc. sHe came .nd wkUh^ ske ^s |a.,. 



THE IRON STOVE 145 

I should never have reached home out of the great 
wild wood had it not been for an iron stove, and I 
have therefore promised to return to it, set it free, and 
marry it." 

The King was so frightened when he heard this that 
he nearly swooned ; for she was his only daughter. They 
thereupon resolved that the miller's daughter, a very 
pretty girl, should take her place; and so she was led 
to the spot, furnished with a knife, and told to scrape a 
hole in the iron stove. For four-and-twenty hours she 
scraped and scraped; but without making the least bit 
of a hole. When day broke, a voice out of the stove 
exclaimed, "It seems to me it is day outside." 

"Yes," replied the girl, "it seems so to me too, and 
methinks I hear the clapping of my father's mill." 

"Oh, then you are the miller's daughter," said the 
voice again. "Well, you may go home, and send the 
Princess to me." 

The girl therefore returned, and told the King the 
stove would not have her, but wanted his daughter, 
which frightened the King again, and made the Princess 
weep. But the King had also in his service a swineherd's 
daughter, prettier even than the miller's daughter, and 
he offered her a piece of gold if she would go to the iron 
stove instead of the Princess. So she was taken to the 
forest and scraped for four-and-twenty hours on the 
iron without producing any impression; and when day 
broke, a voice out of the stove exclaimed, "It seems to 
me it is day outside." 

"Yes, it is so," said the girl; "for I fancy I hear my 
father's horn." 

"Then you are the swineherd's daughter!" said the 
10 



146 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

voice. "Go straight back, and tell the Princess who 
sent you that it must be as I said; and that, if she does 
not come to me, everything in the old kingdom shall 
fall to pieces, and not one stone be left upon another 
anywhere." 

As soon as the Princess heard this she began to cry; 
but it was of no use, for her promise must be kept. So 
she took leave of her father; and carrying a knife with 
her, set out toward the iron stove in the wood. As 
soon as she reached it she began to scrape the iron; 
and before two hours had passed she had already made 
a small hole. Through this she peeped, and beheld 
inside the stove a handsome Prince, whose dress glittered 
with gold and precious stones; and she immediately 
fell in love with him. So she scraped away faster than 
before, and soon had made a hole so large that the Prince 
could get out. 

"You are mine, and I am thine," he said, as soon as 
he stood on the earth. "You are my bride, because 
you have saved me." 

Then he wanted to take her at once to his father's 
kingdom; but she begged that she might once more 
go back to take leave of her father. 

The Prince consented to this; but said she must 
not speak more than three words to him, and then 
immediately return. 

Thereupon the Princess went home; but alas! she 
said many more than three words; and the iron stove 
instantly disappeared, and was carried far away over 
many glass mountains and piercing swords; but without 
the Prince, who was saved, and no longer shut up in his 
former prison. 



THE IRON STOVE 147 

By and by the Princess took leave of her father; 
and taking some gold with her, but not much, she went 
back into the wood, and sought for the iron stove, but 
could find it nowhere. For nine days she searched; 
and then her hunger became so great that she knew not 
how to help herself, and thought she must perish. When 
evening came she climbed a little tree, for she feared the 
wild beasts which night would bring forth. 

Just as midnight approached she saw a little light 
in the distance. 

"Ah, there I may find help," thought she, and getting 
down she went toward the light, saying a prayer as she 
walked along. Soon she came to a little hut, around 
which much grass grew; and before the door stood a 
heap of wood. 

"Ah, whither have I come?" thought she to herself, 
as she peeped through the window and saw nothing but 
toads, little and big; and a table already covered with 
meat and wine, and plates and dishes made of silver. 
But she took courage and knocked; and immediately a 
fat Toad exclaimed: 

" Little Toad, with crooked leg, 
Open quick the door, I beg, 
And see who stands ^^nthout!" 

As soon as these words were spoken, a little Toad came 
running up, and opened the door; and the Princess 
walked in. They all bade her welcome, and told her to 
sit down. Then they asked her whence she came, and 
whither she was going. She told the Toads all that had 
happened, and how, because she had overstepped the 
mark in speaking more than three words, the stove had 
disappeared and the Prince as well: and now she was 



148 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

about to search over hill and valley till she found him. 
When she had told her tale the old fat Toad cried out: 

"Little Toad, with crooked leg, 
Quickly fetch for me, I beg. 
The basket hanging on the peg." 

So the little Toad went and brought the box to the old 
one, who laid it down. Then he had meat and drink 
given to the Princess; and later showed her a beautiful 
neat bed, which felt like silk and velvet, where, under 
God's protection, she slept soundly. 

As soon as day broke the Princess arose; and the old 
Toad gave her three needles out of the box to take with 
her; they would be of use, for she would have to pass 
over a mountain of glass, three sharp swords, and a big 
lake before she could regain her lover. 

Besides the three needles, the old Toad gave her a 
plowwheel and three nuts; and with these the Princess 
set out on her way. 

By and by she approached the glass mountain, which 
was so smooth that she placed the three needles first 
behind her feet, and then before them, and so passed 
over. When she came to the other side she placed the 
three needles in a secure place. Soon she came to the 
three swords, and rolled over them by means of her 
plowwheel. At last she came to the great lake; and 
when she had crossed that, she found herself near a 
fine large castle. Into this she entered, and offered 
herself as a servant, saying she was a poor girl. She 
knew the King's son whom she had rescued out of the 
iron stove was in the castle. After some delay she was 
hired as a kitchen maid, at a very small wage; and soon 
found out that the Prince intended to marry another 



THE IRON STO\^ 149 

lady, because he supposed that the Princess was long 
since dead. 

Then one evening when she had washed and made 
herself neat, she felt in her pocket, and found the three 
nuts which the old Toad had given her. One of them 
she cracked, and instead of a kcniel found a royal dress. 
When the bride heard of this, she said she must have it, 
for it was no dress for a servant maid. But the Princess 
said she would not sell it, but would give it to her on one 
condition, which was, that she should be allowed to pass 
a night in the chamber of the Prince. This request 
was granted, because the bride was so anxious to have 
the dress, for she had none like it. \\1icn evening came 
she told her lover that the silly girl wanted to pass the 
night in his room. 

"If you are willing, so am I," he replied; but she 
gave him a glass of wine, in which she put a sleeping 
draft, and he slept so soundly that the prxor Princess 
could not wake him, although she cried the whole night, 
and kept repeating, "I saved you in the wild forest, 
and rescued you out of the iron stove; I have sought 
you, and traveled over a mountain of glass, and over 
three sharp swords, and across a wide lake, before I 
found you; and still you will not hear me!" 

The servants, however, who sat by the chamber 
door, heard the complaint, and told the Prince of it 
the following morning. That evening after the Princess 
had washed and cleaned herself, she cracked open the 
second nut and found in it a still more beautiful dress; 
The bride declared she must have this also. But it was 
not to be purchased except on the same condition as the 
first; and the Prince allowed her to sleep in his room as 



150 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

she had before. The bride, however, gave the Prince 
another sleeping draft; and he slept too soundly to hear 
the poor Princess complaining and crying as on the 
previous night, "I saved you in the wild forest, and 
rescued you out of the iron stove; I have sought you, 
and traveled over a mountain of glass, and over three 
sharp swords, and across a wide lake, before I found you; 
and still you will not hear me!" The servants, how- 
ever, by the chamber door, heard the crying again, and 
told the Prince of it the next morning. 

On the third evening the poor scullery maid broke 
her third nut, and produced a dress stiff with gold, which 
the bride declared she must have at any price; and the 
maid petitioned the same privilege as before. But this 
time the Prince poured out the sleeping draft; and 
therefore, when the Princess began to cry, "Alas! my 
dear treasure, have you forgotten how I saved you in 
the great wild wood, and rescued you out of the iron 
stove?" the Prince heard her, and jumping up, exclaimed, 
*' You are the true bride. I am thine, and you are mine." 

Thereupon, while it was still night, he got into a 
carriage with the Princess, and they took away the 
clothes of the false bride, that she might not follow them. 
When they came to the lake they rowed over very 
quickly, and passed the three sharp swords again by 
means of the plowwheel. Soon they crossed the glass 
mountain by the aid of the three needles; and arrived 
at last at the little old house, which, as they entered, was 
changed into a noble castle. At the same moment all 
the Toads were disenchanted and returned to their 
natural forms; for they were the sons of the King of the 
country. Then the wedding was performed, and the 



THE IRON STOVE 151 

Prince and Princess remained in the castle; for it was 
much larger than that of her father. However, because 
the old King grieved at his daughter's continual absence, 
they brought him to live with them, and joined the 
government of the two kingdoms in one; and so for many 
years they reigned in happiness and prosperity. 

A mouse did run, 
The slory is done. 



THE MAN OF IRON 

Once upon a time there was a King who possessed a 
great wood which lay behind his castle, wherein it was 
his pleasure to hunt. One day it happened that a hunts- 
man whom he had sent into this wood to shoot him a 
deer did not return as usual. The next day, therefore, 
the King dispatched two others to seek him; but they 
likewise never reappeared. The King then ordered all 
his huntsmen to make themselves ready to scour the 
whole forest in search of their missing companions. 
But, after they had set out, not one of them ever returned 
again, nor even a single dog out of the whole pack that 
accompanied them. After this nobody would venture into 
the wood ; and from that day a profound stillness and deep 
solitude crept over the whole forest, and one saw nothing 
but owls or eagles which now and then flew out. This 
lasted a long time, till finally a strange Huntsman came to 
the King, and, begging an audience, said he was ready 
to go in,.o the dangerous forest. The King would not at 
first give his consent, saying, ' ' I am afraid it will fare no 
better with you than with the others, and that you will 
never return." But the Huntsman replied, "I will dare 
the danger at my own risk, for I know nothing of fear." 

Thereupon the Huntsman entered the forest with 
his dog, and in a few minutes the hound, espying a wild 
animal on the road, pursued it; but it had scarcely gone 
two steps before it stood before a deep pool, out of which 
a naked arm stretched itself, and, catching the dog, 
drew it down beneath the water. 

152 



THE MAN OF IRON 153 

As soon as the Huntsman saw this he went back and 
brought three men, who came with pails to bale out the 
water. When they came to the bottom they found a 
Wild Man, whose body was brown like rusty iron, and 
whose hair hung over his face down to his knees. They 
bound him with cords and led him away to the King, 
who caused an immense iron cage to be fixed in the 
courtyard, and forbade any one on pain of death to 
open the door of the cage. The Queen herself had to 
keep the key in her charge. After this time anybody 
could go with safety into the forest. 

Now the King had a son eight years old who was 
once playing in the courtyard, and during his play his 
golden ball accidentally rolled into the iron cage. He 
ran up to it and demanded his ball of the prisoner. 

"Not till you open my door," replied the man. 

"No, that I cannot," said the boy, "for my father 
the King has forbidden it"; and so sa>'ing he ran away. 

But tlic next morning he came again and asked for 
his golden ball. 

"Open my door," said the Wild Man; but the boy 
refused. 

The third morning the King went out a-hunting; and 
presently the boy went again to the cage, and said, "Even 
if I wished to open the door, I have not the key to do it." 

"It lies under your mother's pillow," said the Wild 
Man, "and you can get it if you like." 

So the boy, casting to the winds all other thoughts 
but his wish to have his ball, ran and fetched the key. 
The door swung heavily, and the boy pinched his finger; 
but soon it opened, and the Wild Man, giving him the 
golden ball, stepped out and hurried off. 



154 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

At this the boy became alarmed, and cried, and 
called after the man, "Wild Man, do not go away or I 
shall be beaten!" 

The man turned round, and, raising the boy up, set 
him upon his shoulders and walked into the forest with 
hasty strides. Soon afterwards the King returned, 
and noticing the empty cage, asked the Queen what had 
happened. She knew nothing about it, and went to 
look for the key, but it was gone. She called her boy, 
but no one answered, and the King sent out people over 
the fields to search for him, but they returned empty 
handed. Then he easily guessed what had really hap- 
pened, and great grief reigned at the royal court. 

Meanwhile, as soon as the Wild Man had reached his 
old haunts he set the boy down ofl his shoulders, and 
said to him: "Your father and mother you shall never 
see again; but I will keep you with me, for you delivered 
me, and therefore I pity you. If you do all that I tell 
you, you will be well treated, for I have much treasure 
and money; in fact, more than any one else in the world." 

That evening the Iron Man let the boy sleep on some 
moss, and the next morning he took him to the pool, 
and said, "See you, this golden water is bright and clear 
as crystal; here you must sit, and watch that nothing 
falls into it, or it will be polluted. Every evening I 
will come, and see if you have obeyed my commands." 

So the boy sat down on the bank of the pool; but 
by and by, while he watched, such a sudden pain seized 
one of his fingers that he plunged it into the water to 
cool it. He quickly drew it out again; but lo! it was 
quite golden, and in spite of all his pains he could not 
rub off the gold again. 



THE MAN OF IRON 155 

In the evening came the Iron Man. After looking 
at the boy, he asked, " WTiat has happened to my pool?" 

"Nothing, nothing!" replied the boy, holding his 
finger behind him, that it might not be seen. 

But the Man said, "You have dipped your finger 
into the water. This time, however, I will overlook it; 
only take care it does not happen again." 

The next day the boy resumed his post at daybreak; 
but in the course of a little while his finger ached again 
and this time he put it to his head, and unluckily pulled 
off a hair, which fell into the water. He took it out 
again very quickly; but it had changed into gold, and 
by and by the Iron Man returned, knowing already what 
had occurred. "You have let a hair fall into the pool," 
he said to the boy; "but once more I will overlook your 
fault, only if it happens again the pool will be polluted, 
and you can remain with me no longer." 

The boy took his usual scat again on the third morn- 
ing, and did not once mov*e his finger, in spite of the 
pain. The time, however, passed so slowly that he fell 
to looking at his face reflected in the mirror of the waters, 
and, while he bent down to do so, his long hair fell over 
his shoulders into the pool. In a great hurry he raised 
his head; but already his locks were turned to gold, 
and shone in the sun. You may imagine how frightened 
the poor boy was! He took his pocket handkerchief and 
bound it round his head, so that no one might see his 
hair; but as soon as the Iron Man returned he said to 
him, "Untie your handkerchief!" for he knew what had 
happened. 

Then the golden hair fell down on the boy's shoulders, 
and he tried to excuse himself, but in vain. 



156 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

"You have not stood the trial," said the Iron Man, 
"and can remain here no longer. Go forth into the 
world, and there you will see how poverty fares; but 
because your heart is innocent, and I mean well toward 
you, I will grant you this one favor — when you are in 
trouble come to this forest, call 'Iron John!' and I will 
come out and help you. My power is great, and I have 
gold and silver in abundance." 

So the young Prince had to leave the forest, and trav- 
eled over many rough and smooth roads till he came at 
length to a large town. There he sought work, but with- 
out success, for he had learned nothing which was of 
use. At last he went to the King's palace itself and 
inquired if they could take him in. The court servants 
knew of no vacancy which he could fill, but because he 
seemed well favored they allowed him to remain. 

Soon afterwards the Cook took him into his service, 
and told him he might fetch wood and water for the 
fire and sweep up the ashes. One day, however, as no 
one else was at hand, the Prince had to carry in a dish 
for the royal table, but, because he would not allow his 
golden hair to be seen, he entered the room with his cap 
on his head. 

"If you come to the royal table," exclaimed the 
King when he saw him, "you must pull off your cap!" 

"Ah! your majesty," repHed the Prince, "I dare not, 
for I have a bad sore on my head." 

Thereupon the King ordered the Cook into his pres- 
ence, and scolded him because he had taken such a youth 
into his service, and further commanded him to dis- 
charge him. But the Cook pitied the poor lad and 
exchanged him for the Gardener's boy. 



THE MAN OF IRON 157 

Now the Prince had to plant and water the garden, 
to dig and hoe, in all weather, were it wind or rain. One 
day in summer, as he was working alone in the garden, 
he took off his cap to cool his head in the breeze, and 
the sun shone so upon his hair that the golden locks 
ghttcred, and their brightness was reflected in the 
chamber of the King's daughter. She jumped up to 
see what it was, and seeing the Gardener's boy, called 
him to bring her a nosegay of flowers. In a great hurry 
he put on his cap and plucked some wild flowers, which 
he arranged together. But, as he was going up the steps 
with them to the Princess, the Gardener met him, and 
said, "How can you tiike the Princess such a nosegay 
of bad flowers? Go back and fetch the rarest and most 
beautiful." 

"Oh, no!" said the boy, "the wild flowers have more 
scent and will please her best." So he went up to the 
chamber, and there the Princess said to him, "Take off 
your cap; it is not becoming of you to wear it here!" 

The boy, however, replied he dared not remove it, 
because his head was too ugly to look at, but she seized 
his cap and pulled it off, and his golden hair fell down 
over his shoulders, most beautiful to sec. The boy 
would have run away, but the Princess held him by the 
arm and gave him a handful of ducats. Then he left 
her and took her money to the Gardener, whom he told 
to give it to his children to play with, for he cared nothing 
for the money. The following day the Princess called 
him again to give her a wreath of wild flowers, and when 
he entered with them she snatched again at his cap, 
but this time he held it fast with both hands, and would 
not let it go. She gave him still another handful of 



158 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

ducats, but he would not keep them, but gave them to 
the Gardener's children for playthings. The third day- 
it was just the same: the Princess could not get his 
cap and he would not keep her ducats. 

Not long after this the country was drawn into a 
war, and the King collected all his people, for he knew 
not whether he should be able to make a stand against 
the enemy, who were superior in strength, and had 
an immense army. Amongst others, the Gardener's 
boy asked for a horse, saying he was grown up and 
ready to take his part in the fight. The others, however, 
laughed at him, and said, "When we are gone we will 
leave behind a horse for you, but take care of yourself!" 

So, as soon as the rest had set out, the young Prince 
went into the stable, and found there a horse which 
was lame, and limped hobblety jig, hobblety jig. Never- 
theless, he mounted it, and rode away to the gloomy 
forest. As soon as he arrived there he called, "Iron 
John!" three times in such a loud voice that the trees 
reechoed it. 

The Wild Man immediately appeared, and asked, 
"What do you desire?" 

"I desire a strong horse, for I am going to battle," 
said the youth. 

"That you shall have, and more than you desire," 
said the Iron Man, and dived in among the trees. Then 
suddenly a groom made his appearance, holding a fiery 
charger with snorting nostrils and so mettlesome that he 
was scarcely to be touched. Behind the steed followed 
a troop of warriors, all clad in iron, with swords which 
glittered in the sun. The youth, thereupon, delivered 
up his three-legged horse to the page, and, mounting 



THE MAN OF IRON 159 

the other, rode off at the head of his troop. When he 
reached the field of battle he found the greater part of 
the King's army already slain, and the rest on the point 
of yielding. The youth, therefore, charged at once with 
his iron troop, like a storm of hail, against the enemy, 
and cut down all who opposed him. The enemy turned 
and fled, but the young Prince pursued and cut to pieces 
all the fugitives, so that not one man was left. Then, 
instead of leading his troop before the King, he rode back 
with them to the forest, and summoned the Iron Man. 

"What do you desire now?'* he inquired. 

"Take back all these soldiers and your steed, and 
restore to me my three-legged horse." 

All this was done as he wished, and he rode home on 
his limping animal. When the King arrived afterwards, 
his daughter greeted him, and congratulated him on his 
victory. 

"I do not deserve it," he said; "the victory I owe to 
a strange knight who came to otir aid with his troop." 

His daughter inquired then who he was; but the 
King told her he did not know, for the knight had pur- 
sued the enemy and had not returned again. The 
Princess afterwards asked the Gardener respecting his 
boy, and he laughed, and said he had just returned home 
on his three-legged steed, while the others had laughed 
at him, crying, "Here comes our Hop-a-da-hop ! " 

They asked also behind what hedge he had been 
sleeping, and he replied, "I have done the best I could, 
and without me you would have fared badly." And 
for this speech the poor boy was still more mocked. 

Sometime after this the King said to his daughter; 
" I will cause a great festival to be held, which shall last 



i6o GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

three days, and you shall throw a golden apple. Per- 
haps the unknown knight will contend for it." 

As soon as the proclamation was made, the young 
Prince went to the forest, and called for Iron John. 

"What do you desire?" he asked. 

"That I may catch the King's daughter's golden 
apple!" 

" It is all the same as if you had it now," said the Iron 
Man; "but you shall have a suit of red armor for the 
occasion, and ride there upon a proud fox-colored horse." 

When the appointed day came the youth ranged 
himself along with the other knights, and was not recog- 
nized by any one. Presently the Princess stepped for- 
ward and threw up the golden apple, which nobody could 
catch but the Red Knight, who coursed away as soon as 
he obtained it. The second day the Iron Man dressed 
the youth as a White Knight, and gave him a gray horse; 
and again he caught the apple, and he alone. 

The King was angry when the Knight ran away with 
the prize, and said, "That is not right; he must appear 
before me and declare his name." 

Then he commanded that if the Knight who had 
caught the apple did not return the next day, some one 
should pursue him; and, if he would not return will- 
ingly, they were to cut him to pieces. The third day 
the Prince received from the Iron Man a coat of black 
armor and a black steed, and again caught the apple 
when it was thrown. When he rode away the King's 
people pursued him, and one came so near him that he 
wounded the youth's knee with the point of his sword. 
Still he escaped them ; but his horse jumped so violently 
that the helmet fell off the Knight's head, and his golden 



THE MAN OF IRON i6i 

hair was seen. The knights thereupon rode back and 
told the King. 

The day following these sports the Princess asked 
the Gardener about his boy. 

"He is working in the garden," he replied; "the 
wonderful fellow also has been to the festival, and 
yesterday evening he returned home and showed my 
children three golden apples which he won there.'* 

When the King knew of this he caused the youth 
to be brought before him, and he appeared as usual 
with his cap on his head. But the Princess went up 
to him and took it off; and then the golden hair fell 
down over his shoulders, and he appeared so handsome 
that every one was astonished. 

'Are you the knight who appeared each day at the 
festival, always in a different color, and won the three 
golden apples?" asked the King. 

"Yes," he replied, "and these are the apples"; 
and, so saying, he took them out of his pocket and 
handed them to the King. "If you desire any other 
proof," he continued, " I will show you the wound which 
your people gave me as I rode away; but I am also the 
knight who helped you win yoiir victory over your 
enemy." 

"If you can do such deeds," said the King, "you are 
no gardener's boy; tell me, who is your father?" 

"My father is a mighty King, and gold I have in 
plenty as great as I require," said the young Prince. 

"I own," said the King, "that I am indebted to you. 
Can I do anything to give you pleasure?" 

"Yes, you can. Give me your daughter to wife!" 
replied the youth. The Princess thereupon laughed, 
11 



i62 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

and said, "He makes no roundabout tale; but I saw 
long ago that he was no gardener's boy from his golden 
hair"; and with these words she went and kissed him. 

By and by the wedding was celebrated, and to it 
came the Prince's father and mother, who had long 
ago given up their son for dead, and lost all hope of 
seeing him again. 

While they sat at the bridal feast all at once the 
music suddenly stopped, and, the doors opening, a 
proud King entered, attended by a long train. He 
went up to the young Prince, and embraced him, and 
said, "I am Iron John, who was by enchantment a wild 
man; but you have set me free; all the treasures which 
belong to me are henceforth your property!" 



THE DRUMMER 

One evening a young Drummer was walking all alone 
on the seashore, and as he went along he found three 
pieces of linen lying on the sand. "What fine linen!" 
said he; and picking up one of the pieces, he put it in 
his pocket and went home, thinking no more of his dis- 
covery. By and by he went to bed ; and just as he was 
about to fall asleep he fancied he heard some one call 
his name. He listened, and presently distinguished a 
gentle voice, calling, "Drummer, Drummer, awake!" 

He could see nothing, for it was quite dark: but he 
felt as if something were flitting to and fro over his bed. 

"What do you want?" he asked at length. 

"Give me back my dress," replied the voice, "which 
you found yesterday on the seashore." 

"You shall have it again if you tell me who you are." 

"Alas! I am the daughter of a mighty King; but I 
have fallen into the power of a Witch, who has confined 
me on the glass mountain. Every day I am allowed 
to bathe with my two sisters in the sea: but I cannot 
fly away again without my dress. Yester-eve my 
sisters escaped as usual, but I was obliged to stay behind, 
so I beg you to give me my dress again." 

"Rest happy, poor child," replied the Drimimer, 
"I will readily give it back"; and feeling for it in his 
pocket, he handed it to her. 

She hastily snatched it, and would have hurried away, 
but the Drummer exclaimed, "Wait a moment! Per- 
haps I can help you!" 

163 



1 64 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

"That you may do," said the voice, "if you dimb 
up the glass mountain and free me from the Witch; 
but you could not get there, not yet ascend, were you 
to try." 

"Where there's a will there's a way," said the Drum- 
mer. " I pity you, and I fear nothing; but I do not know 
the way to the glass mountain." 

"The path lies through the large forest, where the 
giants are," said the child. " More I dare not tell you." 
And, so saying, she flew away. 

At break of day the Drummer arose, and hanging 
his drum round him walked straight away without 
fear into the forest. After he had gone some distance 
without meeting any giant he thought he would awake 
the sleepers; and so, steadying his drum, he beat a roll 
upon it which disturbed all the birds so much that they 
flew off. 

In a few minutes a Giant raised himself from the 
ground, where he had been lying asleep on the grass; 
and his height was that of a fir tree. 

"You wretched wight!" he exclaimed, "what are 
you drumming here for, waking me out of my best sleep? " 

"I am drumming," replied the Drummer, "to show 
the way to the many thousands who follow me." 

"What do they want here in my forest?" asked 
the Giant. 

"They are coming to make a path through, and rid 
it of such monsters as you," said the Dnmimer. 

"Oho! I shall tread them down like ants." 

"Do you fancy you will be able to do anything 
against them?" said the Drummer. "Why, if you 
bend down to catch any of them, others will jump upon 



THE DRUMMER 165 

your back; and then when you lie down to sleep they 
will come from every bush and creep upon you. And 
each one has a steel hammer in his girdle, with which 
he means to beat out your brains." 

The Giant was terribly frightened to hear all this, 
and he thought to himself: "If I meddle with these 
crafty people they will do me some injury. I can 
strangle wolves and bears, but these earthworms I 
cannot guard against." 

Then speaking aloud he said, "Here, you little 
fellow, I promise for the future to leave you and your 
comrades in peace; and if you have a wish, tell it to 
me, for I will do anything to please you." 

"Well, then," replied the Dnmimer, "as you have 
long legs, and run quicker than I, carry me to the glass 
mountain, and I will beat a retreat march to my com- 
panions, so that for this time you shall not be disturbed." 

"Come hither, you worm," said the Giant; "set 
yourself on my shoulder, and I will bear you whither 
you desire." 

The Giant took him up; and the Dnmimer began 
to beat with all his might and main. "That is the 
sign," thought the Giant, "for the others to go back." 
After a while a second Giant started up on the road, 
and taking the Drummer from the shoulders of the 
first, put him in his button-hole. The Drtunmer took 
hold of the button, which was as big as a plate, to hold 
on by and looked round in high spirits. By and by 
they met a third Giant, who took him out of the button- 
hole and placed him on the rim of his hat. Here the 
Dnmimer walked round and round, observing the coun- 
try; and perceiving in the blue distance a mountain^ 



i66 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

he supposed it to be the glass mountain, and so it was. 
The Giant took only a couple more strides and arrived 
at the foot of the mountain, where he set down the 
Drummer. 

The latter wished to be taken to the summit; but 
the Giant only shook his head and went away, mutter- 
ing something in his beard. 

So there the poor Drummer was left standing before 
the mountain, which was as high as if three hills had 
been placed on each other, and withal as smooth as a 
mirror, so that he knew not how he should ascend it. 
He began to climb, but in vain; he slipped back every 
step. 

" Oh that I were a bird! " he exclaimed. But of what 
use was wishing? Wings never grew for that. While 
he considered, he saw at a little distance two men hotly 
quarreling. He went up to them and found that their 
dispute related to a saddle, which lay on the ground 
before them, and for the possession of which they were 
contending. 

"What fools you are," he exclaimed, "to quarrel 
about a saddle for which you have no horse." 

"The saddle is worth fighting about," replied one, 
"for whoever sits upon it may wish himself where he 
will, and may go even to the end of the world if he so 
desire. The saddle belongs to us in common; but 
it is now my turn to ride, and this other will not let 
me." 

"I will soon end your quarrel!" exclaimed the Dnmi- 
mer, walking a few steps forward, and planting a white 
wand in the ground. "Run both of you to that point, 
and whoever gets there first shall ride first." 



THE DRUMMER 167 

The two men started off at once, but they had scarcely 
gone two steps when the Dnimmer sat himself hastily 
down on their saddle, and, wishing himself on the top 
of the glass mountain, was there before one could turn 
his hand round. On the summit was a large plain 
w^here stood an old stone mansion, and before its door 
a fish pond, and behind, a dark wood. The Drimimer 
saw neither man nor beast. All was still, but the noise 
of the wind among the trees; while close above his head 
the clouds were rolling along. He stepped up to the 
door of the house and knocked thrice, and after the 
third time an old Woman with red eyes and a brown 
face opened it. She had spectacles upon her nose, 
and looked at him very sharply before she asked what 
his business was. 

"Entrance, a night's lodging, and provisions," repHed 
the Drummer boldly. 

"That you shall have, if you promise to perform 
three tasks!" said she. 

"And why not?" he replied, "I am not afraid of 
work, be it ever so hard!" 

So the old Woman let him come in, and gave him 
supper, and afterwards a good bed. 

The next morning when the Drtimmer arose the old 
Woman handed him a thimble off her withered finger, 
and said: "Now go to work and empty the pond out 
there with this thimble. You must finish it before 
night; and besides that, you must take out all the fishes, 
and range them according to their species upon the 
bank." 

"That is a queer job!" said the Drummer; but 
going to the pond he began to thimble out the water. 



i68 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

He worked all the morning, but what could he do with 
a single thimble if he kept at work for a thousand years? 

When noonday came he stopped and sat down; 
for he thought, "It is no use, and all the same whether 
I work or not." 

Just then, a girl came from the house and brought 
him a basket of provisions. "What do you want," 
she asked, "that you sit there so sorrowful?" 

The Dnmimer looked up, and seeing that the girl 
was very beautiful, he replied: "Alas! I cannot per- 
form the first task, and how I shall do the others, I 
cannot tell ! I have come here to seek a King's daughter, 
who lives hereabouts, but I have not found her, and 
I must go farther." 

"Stop here!" said the girl. "I will help you out of 
your trouble. You are tired, so lay your head in my 
lap and go to sleep; when you awake again the work 
will be done!" 

The Drummer did not need telling twice, and as 
soon as his eyes were closed the maiden pressed a wishing 
ring which she wore, and said: "Out water, out fishes." 
Immediately the water rose in the air like a white vapor, 
and rolled away with the other clouds, while the fishes 
all jumped out, and arranged themselves on the banks 
according to their size and species. 

By and by the Drummer awoke and to his astonish- 
ment saw his work completed. "One of the fishes," 
said the maiden, "does not lie with its companions, 
but quite alone; and so, when the old Woman comes 
this evening and sees that all is done, she will ask why 
this fish is left out, and you must take it up and throw 
it in her face, saying, 'That is for you, old Witch.'" 



THE DRUMMER 169 

When it was evening the old Woman came and asked 
the question, and he immediately threw the fish in her 
face. She did not appear to notice it, but only looked 
silently and maliciously at him. 

The next morning she said to him: "You got off 
too easily yesterday; I must give you a harder task; 
to-day you must cut down all my trees, split the wood 
into fagots, and range them in bundles; and all must 
be ready by night." 

With these words she gave him an ax, a mallet, and 
two wedges; but the first was made of lead and the 
others of tin. When, therefore, he began to chop, the 
ax doubled quite up, while the mallet and wedges stuck 
together. He knew not what to do; but at noon the 
girl came again with his dinner and comforted him. 

"Lay your head in my lap," said she, "and when 
you awake the work will be done." 

Thereupon she turned her wishing ring, and at the 
same moment the whole forest fell with a crash, the 
timber split of itself and laid itself together in heaps, 
as if innumerable giants were at work. 

As soon as the Dnmimer awoke the maiden said 
to him, "See, here is all your wood properly cut and 
stacked, with the exception of one bough. If the old 
Woman ask the reason for this, when she comes this 
evening, give her a blow with the bough, and say, ' That 
is for thee, old Witch.'" 

Accordingly, when the old Woman came she said, 
"See how easy the work is; but for whom is this bough 
left out?" " For you, old Witch ! " replied the Dnmimer, 
giving her a blow. But she appeared not to feel it, and, 
laughing fiendishly, said to him: "To-morrow you shall 



170 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

lay all the wood in one pile, and kindle and bum it." 

At daybreak he arose and began to work; but how 
could a single man pile up a whole forest? The work 
proceeded very slowly. The maiden, however, did 
not forget him in his troubles, and as usual brought 
him his midday meal. After eating he laid his head 
in her lap and slept. On awaking he found the whole 
pile burning in one immense flame, whose tongues of 
fire reached up to heaven. 

"Attend to me,'* said the maiden to him. "When 
the Witch comes she will demand something singular, 
but do what she desires without fear, and you will take 
no harm. But if you are afraid, the fire will catch 
and consume you. Lastly, when you have fulfilled 
her demands take her with both hands and throw her 
into the midst of the flames." 

Thereupon the girl left him, and presently the old 
Woman slipped in, crying, "Hu! hu! how I freeze! But 
there is fire to warm me and my old bones. That is 
well, but," she continued, turning to the Drummer, 
"there is a log which will not bum, fetch it out for me. 
Come, if you do that you shall be free and go where 
you will, only be brisk." 

Without a moment's consideration the Drummer 
plunged into the flames; but they did him no harm, 
not even singeing a single hair. He bore the fagot off 
and laid it beside the old Witch ; but as soon as it touched 
the earth it changed into the beautiful maiden who 
had delivered him from his trouble, and he knew at 
once by her silken shining robes that she was the King's 
daughter. 

The old Woman laughed fiendishly again, and 



THE DRUMMER 171 

exclaimed, "Do you think you have her? Not yet, not 
yet ! ' * And so saying, she would have seized the maiden ; 
but the Dnmmier, catching her with both his hands, 
threw her into the middle of the burning pile, and 
the flames closed in around her, as if rejoicing in the de- 
struction of such a Witch. 

When this was done the maiden looked at the Dnmi- 
mer, and seeing that he was a handsome youth, 
and that he had ventured his life to save hers, she held 
out her hand to him and said: "You have dared a 
great deal for me, and I must do something for you. 
Promise me to be true and faithful, and you shall be 
my husband. For wealth we shall not want. We 
have enough here in the treasure which the old Witch 
has gathered together." 

Thereupon she led him into the house and showed 
him chests upon chests filled with treasures. They 
left the gold and silver and took nothing but diamonds 
and pearls; and then, as they no longer wished to remain 
on the glass mountain, the Dnmimer proposed that 
they should descend on the wishing saddle. 

"The old saddle does not please me," said the maiden, 
"and I need only turn the ring on my finger and we 
shall be at home." 

"Well, then, wish us at the city gate," replied the 
Drummer, and in the twinkling of an eye they were 
there. "I will go and take the news to my parents 
first," said the Drummer. "Wait here for me, for I 
shall soon be back." 

"Ah! I pray you then take care not to kiss your 
parents on the right cheek when you arrive, else will you 
forget everything, and I shall be left alone in this field.'* 



172 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

"How can I forget you?" said he, and promised 
her faithfully to return in a very short time. When 
he entered his father's house nobody knew him, he was 
so altered, for the three days which he had imagined 
he had spent on the glass mountain were three long 
years. He soon recalled himself to their remembrance, 
and his parents hung round his neck, so that, moved 
by affection, he entirely forgot the maiden's injunc- 
tions and kissed them on both cheeks. Every thought 
concerning the Princess at once faded from his mind, 
and emptying his pockets, he laid handfuls of precious 
stones upon the table. The parents did not know what 
to do with so much wealth, but at length they built a 
noble castle surrounded by gardens, woods, and meadows, 
and fit for a Prince to inhabit. When it was done the 
mother of the Dnmmier said to him, "I have looked 
out for a wife for you, and you shall be married in three 
days' time." 

Now the Dnmimer was quite content with all that 
his parents proposed; but the poor Princess was very 
disconsolate. For a long time after he first left her she 
waited for him in the fields; but when evening fell 
she believed that he had kissed his parents on the right 
cheek, and forgotten all about her. Her heart was 
full of grief, and she wished herself in some solitary forest 
that she might not return to her father's court. Every 
evening she went to the city and passed by the Drum- 
mer's house, but although he saw her many times he 
never recognized her. At last one day she heard the 
people talking of the wedding of the Dnunmer, and 
she resolved to try to regain his love. 

As soon as the first festival day was appointed, she 



THE DRUMMER 173 

turned her wishing ring, saying, "A dress as shining as 
the sun." Immediately there lay before her a dress 
that seemed to be woven out of the piu"est sunbeams! 
Then as soon as the guests had assembled she slipped 
into the hall. Everybody admired her beautiful dress; 
but most of all the bride elect, who had a passion for 
fine dresses, and went up to her and asked if she would 
sell it. "Not for money," replied the Princess; "but 
for the privilege of sleeping one night outside the door 
of the room where the bridegroom sleeps." 

The bride elect could not resist her wish for the dress, 
and so she consented; but first of all she mixed in the 
sleeping draft of the bridegroom a strong potion which 
prevented him from being awakened. By and by, 
when aP was quiet, the Princess crept to the chamber 
door, and opening it slightly, called gently: 

' ' Drummer ! Drummer ! Oh, list to me ! 
Forget not what I did for thee ! 
Think of the moimtain of glass so high, 
Think of the Witch and her cruelty; 
Think of my phghted troth with thee : 
Drummer ! Drummer ! Oh, list to me!" 

But she cried all in vain. The Dnmimer did not 
awaken, and when day dawned the Princess was forced 
to leave. The second evening she tiuned her wishing 
ring, and said, "A dress as silvery as the moon." 
As soon as she had spoken it lay before her. When 
she appeared in it at the ball the bride elect wished to 
have it as well as the other, and the Princess gave it 
to her for the privilege of passing another night outside 
the door of the chamber of the bridegroom. That 



174 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

night when all was quiet the Princess again crept to 
the chamber door, and opening it slightly, called gently: 

"Drummer! Drummer! Oh, list to me! 
Forget not what I did for thee ! 
Think of the mountain of glass so high, 
Think of the Witch and her cruelty; 
Think of my plighted troth with thee : 
Drummer ! Drummer ! Oh, list to me!" 

But this time, too, she cried in vain. The Drummer 
did not awaken, and when day dawned the Princess 
was forced to leave. 

The servants in the house, however, had overheard 
the plaint of the strange maiden, and they told the 
bridegroom about it. They told him also that it was 
not possible for him to hear anything that was said 
because of the potion which was put into his sleeping draft. 

The third evening the Princess turned her ring and 
wished for a dress as glittering as the stars. As soon 
as she appeared in the ballroom thus arrayed the bride 
elect was enchanted with its beauty, and declared 
rapturously, "I must and will have it." 

The maiden gave it up, as she had given the others, 
for permission to spend the night outside the door of 
the bridegroom's chamber. This time, however, he 
did not drink his wine, but poured it behind the bed; 
and so, when all the house was quiet, he heard a gentle 
voice repeating: 

"Drvimmer! Dnmmier! Oh, list to me! 
Forget not what I did for thee ! 
Think of the mountain of glass so high, 
Think of the Witch and her cruelty; 
Think of my plighted troth with thee: 
Drummer! Drummer ! Oh, list to me!" 



THE DRUMMER 175 

All at once his memory returned, and he exclaimed, 
"Alas! alas! how could I have treated you so heart- 
lessly! But the kisses I gave my parents on the right 
cheek in the excess of my joy, bewildered me." 

He jumped up, and taking the Princess by the hand, 
led her to the bedside of his parents. 

"This is my true bride," said he; "and if I marry 
the other I shall do a grievous wrong." 

When the parents heard all that had happened they 
gave their consent, and thereupon the lights in the hall 
were rekindled, the dnmis and trumpets were brought 
back, the friends and visitors invited to come again, 
and the true wedding was celebrated with great pomp 
and happiness. 

The second bride was given the three splendid dresses, 
and was as well contented as if she had been married! 



THE TWO WANDERERS 

It is certain that hills and valleys always meet, 
and it often happens on the earth that the children of 
men, both the good and the wicked, cross each other's 
paths continually. So it once occurred that a Shoe- 
maker and a Tailor fell together during their travels. 
Now the Tailor was a merry little fellow, always making 
the best of everything; and, as he saw the Shoemaker 
approaching from the opposite road, and observed 
by his knapsack of what trade he was, he began a little 
mocking rime, singing: 

"Stitch, stitch away with your needle, 
Pull away hard with your thread, 
Rub it with wax to the right and the left, 
And knock the old peg on the head!" 

The Shoemaker, however, could not take a joke, and 
drew a long face as if he had been drinking vinegar. 
He seemed inclined to lay hold of the Tailor by the 
collar, but the Tailor began to laugh, and handed his 
bottle to the other, saying, "It is not ill meant; just 
drink, and wash down your anger." 

The Shoemaker took a long pull, and immediately 
the gathering storm vanished; and, as he gave the 
Tailor back his bottle, he said, "I should have spoken 
to you roughly, but one talks better after long drinking 
than after long thirst. Shall we travel together now?" 

"Right willingly," answered the Tailor, "if you have 
but a mind to go into some large town where work is 
not wanting to those who seek it." 

176 



THE TWO WANDERERS 177 

"That is just the place I shovdd like," rejoined the 
Shoemaker. "In a little nest there is nothing to be 
earned, and the people in the country would rather 
go barefoot than buy shoes." 

So they wandered away, setting always one foot 
before the other, like a weasel in the snow. 

Time enough had both our heroes, but little either 
to bite or break. When they came to the first town they 
went around requesting work, and because the Tailor 
looked so fresh and merry, and had such red cheeks, 
every one gave him what he could spare to do, and 
moreover he was so lucky that the masters* daughters, 
behind the shop, would give him a kiss as he passed. 
So it happened that, when he again met with his com- 
panion his bundle was the better filled of the two. The 
fretful Shoemaker drew a sour face, and thought, "The 
greater the rogue the better the luck"; but the other 
began to laugh and sing, and shared all that he received 
with his comrade. If only a couple of groschen jingled 
in his pocket, he would out with them, and thump 
the table with such force that the glasses danced, and 
it was lightly earned, lightly spent, with him. 

After they had wandered about for some time they 
came to a large forest, through which the road passed 
to the royal city; but there were two ways, one of 
which was seven days long, and the other only two, 
but neither of the travelers knew which was the shorter. 
They therefore sat down under an oak tree to consult 
how they should manage, and for how many days they 
should take bread with them. The Shoemaker said, 
"One must provide for farther than one goes, so I will 
take with me bread for seven days." 

12 



178 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

"What!" cried the Tailor, "carry bread for seven 
days on your back like a beast of burden, so that you 
can't look round! I shall commit myself to God, and 
care for nothing. The money I have in my pocket is 
as good in summer as in winter, but the bread will get 
dry, and musty beside, in this hot weather; even my 
coat does not go as far as it might. Why should we 
not find the right way? Bread for two days, and luck 
with it!" Thereupon each one bought his own bread, 
and then they started into the forest to try their fortune. 

It was as quiet and still as a church. Not a breath 
of wind was stirring, not a brook bubbling, a bird sing- 
ing, nor even a sunbeam shining through the thick 
leaves. The Shoemaker spoke never a word, for the 
heavy bread pressed upon his back so sorely that the 
sweat ran down over his morose and dark countenance. 
The Tailor, on the other hand, was as merry as a lark, 
jumping about, whistling through straws, or singing 
songs. "God in Heaven must be pleased to see me 
so happy," he thought. 

Thus two days passed; but on the third, when no 
end was to be found to the forest, the Tailor's heart 
fell a bit, for he had eaten all his bread. Still he 
did not lose courage, but put his trust in God and his 
own luck. The third evening he lay down under a 
tree hungry, and awoke the next morning not less so. 
The fourth day was the same, and when the Shoemaker 
sat down on an uprooted tree, and devoured his mid- 
day meal, nothing remained to the Tailor but to look on. 

He once begged a bit of bread, but the Shoemaker 
laughed in his face, and said, "You always have been 
so merry, now you can try for once in your life how a 



THE TWO WANDERERS 179 

man feels when he is sad. Birds which sing too early 
in the morning are caught by the hawk in the evening." 
In short, he was without pity for his companion. 

The fifth morning, however, the poor Tailor could 
not stand upright, and could scarcely speak from faint- 
ness: his cheeks, too, were quite white and his eyes 
red. Then the Shoemaker said to him, "To-day I 
will give you a piece of bread, but I must put out your 
right eye for it." 

The unhappy Tailor, who still wished to preserve 
his life, could not help himself. He wept once more 
with both eyes, and then the Shoemaker, who had a 
heart of stone, put out his right eye with a sharp knife. 
Then the poor fellow recollected what his mother had 
once said to him when he had been eating secretly in 
the pantry, "Eat what one can, and suifer what one 
must." As soon as he had swallowed his dearly pur- 
chased bread he got upon his legs again, forgot his 
misfortune, and comforted himself by reflecting that 
he had still one eye left to see with. But on the sixth 
day hunger again tormented him and gnawed him 
almost to the heart. When evening came he sank down 
under a tree, and on the seventh morning he could not 
raise himself from faintness, for death sat on his neck. 

The Shoemaker said, "I will yet show you mercy 
and give you a piece of bread, but as a recompense I 
must put out your left eye." The Tailor, remembering 
his past thoughtlessness, begged pardon of God and 
then said to his companion, "Do what you will, I 
will bear what I must; but remember that our God 
watches every action; and that another hour will come 
when the wicked deed shall be punished which you have 



i8o GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

practiced upon me, and which I have never deserved. 
In prosperous days I shared with you what I had. My 
business is one which requires stitch for stitch. If I 
have no longer sight, I can sew no more, and must go 
begging. Let me not, when I am blind, lie here all alone, 
or I shall perish." 

The Shoemaker, however, had driven all thoughts 
about God out of his heart, and he took the knife and 
put out the left eye of his comrade. Then he gave 
him a piece of bread to eat, reached him a stick, and 
led him behind him. 

As the sun was setting they came out of the forest, 
and before them in a field stood a gallows. The Shoe- 
maker led the blind Tailor to it, left him lying there, and 
went his way. From weariness, pain, and hunger, the 
poor fellow slept the whole night long, and when he 
awoke at daybreak he knew not where he was. Upon 
the gallows hung two poor sinners, and upon the head 
of each sat a crow. Then one of the men who had 
been hanged said to the other, "Brother, are you 
awake?" "Yes, I am," replied the second. "Then 
I will tell you something," said the first. "The dew 
which has fallen over us this night from the gallows 
will give sight to him who needs it if he but wash himself 
with it. If the bUnd knew this, how many are there 
who would once more be able to see who now think it 
impossible!" 

When the Tailor heard this he took his handkerchief, 
and spread it on the grass, and as soon as it was soaked 
with dew he washed his eyeballs with it. Immediately 
the words of the man on the gallows were fulfilled, and 
he saw as clearly as ever. A short while afterwards 



THE TWO WANDERERS i8i 

the Tailor saw the sun rise over the mountains, and 
before him in the distance lay the King's city, with its 
magnificent gates and hundred towers, over which the 
golden balls and crosses on the spires and pinnacles 
began to glisten in the sunbeams. He could see every 
leaf upon the trees, every bird which flew by, and the 
gnats which danced in the air. He took a needle out 
of his pocket, and when he found he could pass the 
thread through the eye as easily as ever, his heart leaped 
for joy. He threw himself upon his knees and thanked 
God for the mercy shown to him, and while he said his 
morning devotions he did not forget to pray for the 
two poor sinners who swung to and fro in the wind like 
the pendulimi of a clock. Then he took his bundle 
upon his back, and, forgetting his past sorrows and 
troubles, jogged along, singing and whistling. 

The first thing he met was a brown Filly, which 
was running about in the fields at liberty. The Tailor 
caught it by its mane, and would have swung himself 
on its back to ride into the city, but the Filly begged 
for its liberty, saying, "I am still too young; even a 
light tailor like you would break my back. Let me run 
about till I am stronger; a time will come, perhaps, 
when I can reward you." 

"Run away, then," replied the Tailor. "I see you 
are still a romp!" and with these words he gave it a 
touch with a switch which made it lift its hind legs for 
joy, and spring away over a hedge and ditch into a 
field. 

But the Tailor had eaten nothing since the previous 
day, and he thought to himself, "The sun certainly 
fills my eyes, but the bread does not fill my mouth. 



i82 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

The first thing which meets me now must suffer, if it 
be at all eatable." 

Just then a Stork came walking very seriously over 
the meadow. 

"Stop, stop!" cried the Tailor, catching it by the 
leg. "I don't know if you are fit to eat, but my hunger 
will not admit of choice; so I must chop off your head 
and roast you." 

"Do it not," answered the Stork. "I am a sacred 
bird, to whom nobody offers an injury, and I bring great 
profit to man. Leave me alone, and I can recompense 
you at some future time." 

"Be off. Cousin Longlegs," said the Tailor; and the 
Stork, raising itself from the ground, flew gracefully 
away, with its long legs hanging downwards. 

"What will come of this?" said the Tailor to himself. 
"My hunger grows ever stronger, and my stomach yet 
more empty: what next crosses my path is lost." 

As he spoke he saw a pair of young Ducks swimming 
upon a pond. "You have come just when you were 
called," cried he, and, seizing one by the neck, he was 
about to twist it round, when an old bird which was hid 
among the reeds began to quack loudly, and swam with 
open bill to the Tailor, begging him pitifully to spare 
her dear child. 

"Think what your poor mother would say if one 
took you away and put an end to your life!" 

"Be quiet!" replied the good-natured Tailor, "you 
shall have your child again." And he put the prisoner 
back into the water. 

As soon as he turned round again he perceived an 
old hollow tree, and the wild bees flying in and out. 



THE TWO WANDERERS 183 

"Here at once I shall find the reward of my good deed," 
said the Tailor; "the honey will refresh me." But 
scarcely had he spoken when the Queen Bee flew out 
and thus addressed him: "If you touch my people, 
and disturb my nest, our stings shall pierce your skin 
like ten thousand red-hot needles. Leave us in peace, 
and go your own way, and perhaps at a future time 
you shall receive a reward for it." 

The Tailor realized at once that nothing was to be 
had there. "Three empty dishes and nothing in the 
fourth is a bad meal," thought he to himself; and, 
trudging on, he soon reached the city, where, as it was 
just striking twelve, he found a dinner ready cooked in 
the inn, and gladly sat down to table. When he was 
satisfied he determined to go and seek work, and as he 
walked around the city he soon found a master, who 
gave him a good welcome. Since he knew his business 
thoroughly he became quite famed, and everybody 
would have his new coat made by the little Tailor. 
Every day added to his consequence, and he said to 
himself, "I can get no higher in my art, and yet every 
day trade gets brisker." At length he was appointed 
court tailor. 

But how things do turn out! The same day his 
former comrade was made court shoemaker; and when 
he saw the Tailor, and found that his eyes were as bright 
and good as ever, his conscience pricked him. But he 
thought to himself, "Before he revenges himself on me 
I must dig a pit for him." 

Now he who digs a pit for another often falls into 
it himself. In the evening, when the Shoemaker had 
finished his work and it was become quite dark, he slipped 



i84 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

up to the King and whispered, "May it please your 
Majesty, this Tailor is an arrogant fellow, and has 
boasted that he can recover the crown which has been 
lost so long." 

"That would please me much!" replied the King. 
"Let the Tailor come here to-morrow." 

When he came the King ordered him to find the 
crown again, or to leave the city forever. 

"Oho! oho!" thought the Tailor; "a rogue gives 
more than he has. If the crusty old King desires from 
me what no man can produce, I will not wait till morning, 
but this very day make my escape out of the town." 

So thinking, he tied together his bundle and marched 
out of the gate; but it grieved him sorely to give up 
his business, and to turn his back upon the city where 
he had been so fortunate. Soon he came to the pond 
where he had made acquaintance with the Ducks, and 
there by the shore sat the old one whose children he 
had spared, pluming herself with her bill. She recog- 
nized him, and asked why he hung his head so. 

"You will not wonder," he replied, "when you hear 
what has happened"; and he told her his story. 

"If that be all," said the Duck, "we can assist you. 
The crown has fallen into the water, and lies at the 
bottom of this pond, whence we will soon fetch it. Mean- 
while, spread your handkerchief out on the shore." 
With these words the Duck dived down with her twelve 
young ones, and in five minutes they were up again, 
carrying the crown, which, resting on the old bird's 
wings, was borne up by the bills of the twelve ducklings 
who swam around. They came to shore and laid the 
crown on the handkerchief. You could not believe 




In five minutes they were up again, carrying the crown 



THE TWO WANDERERS 185 

how beautiful it was; for when the sun shone on it, it 
gHttered like a hundred thousand carbuncles. The 
Tailor tied it up in his handkerchief and carried it to 
the King, who was so much pleased that he hung a chain 
of gold round the Tailor's neck. 

When the Shoemaker found his first plan had failed 
he contrived a second, and stepping before the King, 
said, "May it please your Majesty, the Tailor has 
grown insolent again. He boasts he can model in wax 
the whole castle and all that is in it, loose and fast, 
indoors and outdoors." 

The King thereupon caused the Tailor to be sum- 
moned, and ordered him to model in wax the whole 
castle, with everything that pertained to it, inside and 
outside; and if he did not complete it, or omitted even 
one nail upon the wall, he should be kept prisoner under- 
ground all his lifetime. 

The Tailor thought to himself, "It comes harder 
and harder upon me; no man can do that." And 
throwing his bundle over his shoulder he walked out 
through the gate. When he came to the hollow tree 
he sat down, and hung his head in despair. The bees 
came flying out, and the Queen asked if he had a stiff 
neck, that he kept his head in such a position. 

"Oh, no!" he replied; "something else bows me 
down!" and he related what the King had demanded 
of him. Then the bees began to hum and buzz together, 
and the Queen said to the Tailor: "Go home now, but 
return in the morning, and bring a great sheet with you, 
and about this hour all will be ready." So he returned 
home, but the bees flew to the royal palace, right in at 
the open windows, crept into every comer, and observed 



i86 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

everything in the most minute manner. Then they 
flew back and formed the castle in wax with great speed, 
so that it was ready by evening. The next morning 
the Tailor came, and there stood the whole beautiful 
building, with not a nail upon the wall or a tile upon 
the roof omitted. All was delicately white, and more- 
over, smelled as sweet as honey. The Tailor wrapped 
it carefully in his cloth, and took it to the King, who 
could not sufficiently admire it. He placed it in his 
largest hall and gave the Tailor a house built of stone 
as a reward. 

The Shoemaker, however, did not give up, but went 
again to the King, and said, " May it please your Majesty, 
it has come to the ears of the Tailor that no water springs 
in the castle yard; and he has therefore boasted that 
it shall gush up in the middle to a man's height, clear 
as crystal." 

The King again ordered the Tailor to be summoned, 
and told him that if a stream of water was not nmning 
the following morning, as he had said, the executioner 
should make him a head shorter in that very court. 

The poor Tailor did not think very long, but rushed 
out of the gate, and, as he remembered his life was in 
danger, tears rolled down his cheeks. While he walked 
thus, full of grief, the Filly to which he had once given 
liberty came trotting toward him. It had become a fine 
brown horse. 

" Now is the hour come," it said to the Tailor, "when 
I can reward your kindness. I already know what you 
need, and will soon assist you; but sit upon my back, 
which now could carry two like you." 

The Tailor's courage rose again, and he vaulted 



THE TWO WANDERERS 187 

into the saddle, and the horse carried him full speed into 
the town, and straight to the castle yard. There it 
coursed thrice round as quick as lightning, and at the 
third time fell down. At the same moment a fearful 
noise was heard, and a piece of the ground in the court- 
yard sprang up into the air like a ball, and bounded 
away far over the castle. At the same time a stream 
of water, as high as the man and his horse, and as clear 
as crystal, played up and down like a fountain, and the 
sunbeams danced on it. 

When the King saw this he was astounded, and went 
up and embraced the Tailor before all his court. 

But this fortune did not last long. The King had 
daughters enough, and each one prettier than the other, 
but no son at all. 

Now, the wicked Shoemaker went for the fourth 
time to the King, and said, " May it please your Majesty, 
the Tailor is as arrogant as ever. Now he has boasted 
that, if he liked, he could bring the King a son down from 
the air." 

Thereupon the King ordered the Tailor to be sum- 
moned, and said, "If you bring me a son within nine 
days you shall have my eldest daughter as a wife." 

"The reward is immense," thought the Tailor; 
"and one would willingly do something to win it; but 
now the cherries hang too high for me, and if I climb 
after them the branches will break beneath me, and I 
shall fall." So thinking, he went home, set himself 
with his legs crossed under him upon his worktable, 
and considered what he should do. 

" It is of no use," he cried at length. " I must be off; 
I cannot rest in peace here!" 



i88 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

So he tied up his bundle and hurried out of the gate. 
But just as he arrived upon the meadow he saw his 
old friend the Stork, who, like a world-wise man, walked 
up and down, stood still awhile and considered a frog 
nearer, and at length snapped it up. The Stork came up 
and greeted him. "I see, you have your bundle upon 
your back," it said. "Why have you left the city?" 

The Tailor told the Stork what the King had de- 
manded of him, and how, as he could not do it, he was 
grieving at his ill luck. 

"Do not let your hair grow gray on that account!" 
replied the Stork. " I will help you out of your trouble. 
For a long time 1 have brought infants into the city ; and 
I can also fetch a little prince out of the spring. Go 
home and keep quiet. In nine days return to the royal 
palace, and I will come thither also." 

The Tailor went home, and on the right day went 
to the palace. In a short time the Stork came flying 
through the air, and knocked at the window. The 
Tailor opened it, and Cousin Longlegs marched gravely 
in, and with stately steps passed over the marble floors, 
carrying in his beak a child, as beautiful to look at as 
an angel, and already stretching out its hands toward 
the Queen. The Stork laid it upon her lap, and she 
embraced and kissed it, almost beside herself with 
joy. Before he flew away he took a knapsack off his 
shoulder, and handed it to the Queen; and therein 
were dates and colored bonbons, which were divided 
among the Princesses. But the eldest received none, 
because she took instead the merry young Tailor as 
husband. 

"It seems to me," said the Tailor, "as if I had won a 



THE TWO WANDERERS 189 

great prize. My mother rightly said, *He who trusts 
in God and his own fortune will never go amiss.'" 

The Shoemaker had to make the shoes in which the 
Tailor danced at the wedding, and as soon as he had 
finished them he was ordered to leave the city. The 
road from thence to the forest led him past the gallows; 
and, from rage, disappointment, and weariness with 
the heat of the day, he threw himself on the ground 
beneath it. As soon as he had closed his eyes and 
prepared to go to sleep, the two crows flew down from 
the heads of the two criminals, and with loud cries 
pecked out the Shoemaker's eyes. Insane with rage 
and pain, he ran into the forest, and there he must have 
perished; for nobody has since seen or heard anything 
of the wicked Shoemaker. 



THE STRAW, THE COAL, AND 
THE BEAN 

In a certain village there dwelt a poor old woman, 
who had gathered a dish of beans which she wished to 
cook. So she made a fire upon the hearth, and that it 
might burn the quicker, she lighted it with a handful 
of straw. And as she shook the beans up in the sauce- 
pan, one fell out unperceived, and came down upon the 
ground, near a straw; soon after a glowing coal burst 
out of the fire, and fell just by these two. 

Then the Straw began and said, "My dear friends, 
whence do you come?" 

The Coal replied, "By good luck, I have sprung 
out of the fire, and if I had not jumped away by main 
force, my death had been certain, — I should have been 
reduced to ashes." 

The Bean said, "I also have got away with a whole 
skin, but, had the old woman put me in the pot with 
the others, I should have been boiled to broth, as my 
comrades are." 

"Would a better fate have fallen to my share?" 
said the Straw; "for the old woman has suffocated in 
fire and smoke all my brothers; sixty has she seized 
on at once, and deprived of life; happily, I slipped 
between her fingers." 

"But what shall we do now?" asked the Coal. 

"I think," answered the Bean; "since we have so 
luckily escaped death, we should join in partnership, 
and keep together like good companions: lest a new 

190 



THE STRAW, THE COAL, AND THE BEAN 191 

misfortune overtake us, let us set forth, and travel into 
a strange country." 

This proposition pleased the two others, and they 
set out together on their travels. Presently they came 
to a little stream, over which there was no bridge or 
footplank, and they did not know how they should get 
over. 

The Straw hit upon an idea, and said, "I will lay 
myself across, so that you may walk over upon me, as 
upon a bridge." So the Straw stretched itself from one 
bank to the other, and the Coal, which was of an impet- 
uous nature, tripped boldly upon the newly built bridge. 
But when it came to the middle, and heard the water 
running along beneath, it was frightened, and stood 
still, not daring to go farther. The Straw, however, 
beginning to burn, broke in two and fell into the stream, 
and the Coal, slipping after, hissed as it reached the 
water, and gave up the ghost. The Bean, which had 
prudently remained upon the shore, was forced to laugh 
at this accident, and the joke being so good, it laughed 
so immoderately that it burst itself. Now, they would 
all have been done for alike, if by great good luck a 
tailor, who was out on his wanderings in search of work, 
had not just then sat himself down to rest near the 
stream. Having a commiserating heart, he took out 
needle and thread, and sewed the Bean together. The 
Bean thanked him exceedingly; but, as the tailor used 
black thread, it has happened since that time that every 
Bean has a black seam. 



THE GOLDEN BIRD 

A long, long while ago there was a King who had, 
adjoining his palace, a fine pleasure garden, in which 
stood a tree which bore golden apples. As soon as 
the apples began to ripen they were counted, but the 
next day one was missed. This vexed the King very 
much, and he ordered that watch should be kept every 
night beneath the tree. Having three sons, he sent the 
eldest, when evening set in, into the garden; but about 
midnight the youth fell into a deep sleep, and in the 
morning another apple was missing. The next night 
the second son had to watch, but he fared no better; 
for about midnight he too fell fast asleep, and another 
apple was wanting in the morning. 

The turn was come now to the third son, who was 
eager to go; but the King hesitated for a long time, 
thinking he would be even less wakeful than his brothers; 
but at last he consented. The youth lay down under 
the tree and watched steadily, without letting sleep be 
his master. Just as twelve o'clock struck, something 
rustled in the air, and looking up, he saw a bird flying 
by whose feathers were of bright gold. The bird alighted 
upon the tree, and had just picked off one of the apples 
when the youth shot an arrow at it. 

This did not prevent its flying away, but the arrow 
had struck the plumage and one of its golden feathers 
dropped off. The youth took the feather up, and, 
showing it the next morning to the King, told him what 
he had seen during the night. Thereupon the King 

192 



THE GOLDEN BIRD 193 

assembled his council, and every one declared that a 
single feather like this was worth a kingdom. 

"Well, then," said the King, "if this feather is so 
precious, I must and will have the whole bird." 

The eldest son was now sent out on his travels, and, 
relying on his own prudence, he doubted not that he 
should find the golden bird. When he had walked 
about a mile he saw a Fox sitting at the edge of a forest, 
so he leveled his gun and took aim at it; but the Fox 
cried out, " Do not shoot me, and I will give you a piece 
of good advice ! You are now on the road to the golden 
bird, and this evening you will come into a village where 
two inns stand opposite each other. One will be brightly 
lit up and much merriment will be going on inside, but 
turn not in there; enter rather into the other, though 
it seem a poor place to you." 

The young man, however, thought to himself, "How 
can such a silly beast give me wise advice?" and going 
nearer, he shot at the Fox; but he missed, and the Fox 
stretched out his tail and ran away. After this adventure 
he walked on, and toward evening came to the village 
where stood the two public houses, in one of which sing- 
ing and dancing was going on, while the other looked a 
very ill-conditioned house. 

"I should be a simpleton," said he to himself, "if I 
were to go into this dirty inn while that capital one 
stood opposite." So he entered the dancing room, 
and there, living in feasting and rioting, he forgot the 
golden bird, his father, and all good manners. 

As time passed by, and the eldest son did not return 
home, the second son set out to seek the golden bird. 
The Fox met him as it had his brother, and gave him 

13 



194 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

good counsel, which he did not follow. He likewise 
arrived at the two inns, and out of the window of the 
riotous house his brother leaned, and invited him in. 
He could not resist, and entered, and lived there only 
to gratify his pleasures. 

Again a long time elapsed, with no news of either 
brother, and the youngest wished to go and try his luck; 
but his father would not consent. "It is useless," 
said he; "he is still less hkely than his brothers to find 
the golden bird, and, if a misfortune should happen to 
him, he cannot help himself, for he is not very quick." 
The King at last, however, was forced to consent, for 
he had no rest while he refused. 

On the edge of the forest the Fox was again sitting, 
and again he offered in return for his life the same piece 
of good advice. The youth was good hearted and said, 
"Be not afraid, little Fox; I will do you no harm." 

"You shall not repent of your goodness," replied 
the Fox; "but that you may travel quicker, get up behind 
on my tail." 

Scarcely had he seated himself when away they 
went, over stones and sticks, so fast that their hair 
whistled in the wind. 

As soon as they arrived at the village the youth 
dismounted, and following the advice he had received, 
turned, without glancing round, into the mean-looking 
house, where he passed the night comfortably. The 
next morning, when he went into the fields, he found 
the Fox already there. "I will tell you what further 
you must do," said the Fox. "Go straight forwards, 
and you will come to a castle before which a whole 
troop of soldiers will be sleeping and snoring; be not 



THE GOLDEN BIRD 195 

frightened at them, but go right through the middle 
of the troop into the castle, and through all the rooms, 
till you come into a chamber where a golden bird hangs 
in a wooden cage. Near by stands an empty golden 
cage for show, but take care you do not take the bird 
out of its ugly cage and place it in the golden one, or 
you will fare badly." 

With these words the Fox again stretched out its 
tail, and the King's son riding as before, away they 
went over sticks and stones, till their hair whistled in 
the wind from the pace at which they traveled. 

When they arrived at the castle the youth found 
everything as the Fox had said. He soon discovered 
the room where the golden bird sat in its wooden cage, 
and by it stood the golden one, and three golden apples 
were lying beside it. The youth thought it would be a 
pity to take the bird in such an ugly and dirty cage, 
and opening the door he put it in the splendid one. 
At the moment he did this the bird set up a piercing 
cry. The soldiers awoke, started up, and made him a 
prisoner. The next morning he was brought to trial, 
and when he confessed all he was condemned to death. 
The King, however, said he would spare his life on one 
condition, namely, that he should bring to him the 
golden horse which traveled faster than the wind, 
and then for a reward he should also receive the 
golden bird. 

The young Prince walked out, sighing and sorrowful, 
for where was he to find the golden horse? All at once 
he saw his old friend the Fox, who said, "There, you 
see what has happened because you did not heed what 
I said. But be of good courage; I will protect you, 



196 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

and tell you where you may find the horse. You must 
follow this road straight till you come to a castle: in 
the stable there stands this horse. Before the door 
the grooms will lie fast asleep and snoring, so you can 
quietly lead away the horse. But there is one thing 
you must mind : put on his back the old saddle of wood 
and leather, and not the golden one which hangs close 
by, for if you do it will go ill with you." 

So saying, the Fox stretched out his tail, and again 
they went over sticks and stones till their hair whistled 
in the wind. 

Everything was as the Fox had said, and the youth 
went into the stall where the golden horse was. But 
as he was about to put on the dirty saddle he thought it 
would be a shame if he did not put on such a fine animal 
the saddle which appeared to belong to him, and so he 
took up the golden saddle. Scarcely had the saddle 
touched the back of the horse when it set up a loud 
neigh. The stable boys awoke, seized the youth, and 
threw him into prison. The next morning he was 
condemned to death; but the King promised to give 
him his life and the horse if he could bring him the 
beautiful daughter of the King of the Golden Castle. 

With a heavy heart the youth set out, and by great 
good fortune soon met the Fox. " I should have left you 
in your misfortune," said he; "but I pity you, and am 
willing once more to help you out of your trouble. Your 
road to the palace lies straight before you, and when 
you arrive there, about evening, wait till night, when 
the Princess goes to the bathing house to bathe. As 
soon as she enters the bathhouse, do you spring up 
and give her a kiss, and she will follow you wheresoever 



THE GOLDEN BIRD 197 

you will; only take care that she does not take leave 
of her parents first, or all will be lost." 

With these words the Fox again stretched out his 
tail, and the King's son seating himself thereon, away 
they went over stone and stick till their hair whistled in 
the wind. When they arrived at the golden palace 
the youth found everything as the Fox had foretold, 
and he waited till midnight, when everybody was in a 
deep sleep. At that hour the beautiful Princess went 
to her bath, and he sprang up instantly and kissed her. 
The Princess said she was willing to go with him, but 
begged him earnestly, with tears in her eyes, to permit 
her first to take leave of her parents. At first he with- 
stood her prayers; but, when she wept still more and 
even fell at his feet, he at last consented. Scarcely 
had the maiden stepped up to her father's bedside when 
he awoke, and all the others who were asleep awakening 
too, the poor youth was captured and put into prison. 

The next morning the King said to him, "Thy life 
is forfeited, and thou canst find mercy only if thou 
clearest away the mountain which lies before my window, 
and over which I cannot see; but thou must remove 
it within eight days. If thou accomplish this, then thou 
shalt have my daughter as a reward." 

The King's son at once began digging and shoveling 
away; but when, after seven days, he saw how little 
was effected and that all his work went for nothing, 
he fell into great grief and gave up all hope. But on 
the evening of the seventh day the Fox appeared and 
said, "You do not deserve that I should notice you 
again, but go away and sleep while I work for you." 

When he awoke the next morning, and looked out 



198 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

of the window, the hill had disappeared, and he hastened 
to the King full of joy, and told him the conditions 
were fulfilled. Now, whether he liked it or not, the 
King was obliged to keep his word, and give up his 
daughter. 

Away they went, these two together, and no long 
time had passed before they met the faithful Fox. "You 
have the best certainly," said he, "but to the maiden 
of the golden castle belongs also the golden horse." 

"How shall I obtain it?" inquired the youth. 

"That I will tell you," answered the Fox. "First 
take to the King who sent you to the golden castle the 
beautiful Princess. Then there will be unheard-of joy, 
and they will readily give you the golden horse and 
lead it out to you. Do you mount it, and then give 
your hand to each in parting, and last of all to the Prin- 
cess. Keep tight hold of her hand and swing her up 
behind you, and as soon as that is done ride off, and 
no one can pursue you, for the horse goes as fast as 
the wind." 

All this was happily accomplished, and the King's 
son carried away the beautiful Princess in triumph on 
the golden horse. 

The Fox did not remain behind, but said to the 
Prince, "Now I will help you to get the golden bird. 
When you come near the castle where it is, let the maiden 
get down, and I will take her into my care. Then do 
you ride into the castle yard with the golden horse, 
and at the sight of you there will be such joy that they 
will readily bring out to you the bird. As soon as you 
hold the cage in your hand ride back to us, and take 
the maiden away again." 



THE GOLDEN BIRD 199 

As soon as this deed was done, and the Prince had 
ridden back with his treasure, the Fox said, "Now you 
must reward me for my services." 

"What do you desire?" asked the youth. 

"When we come into yonder wood, shoot me dead, 
and cut off my head and feet." 

"That were curious gratitude!" said the Prince. 
"I cannot possibly do that." 

"If you will not do it, I must leave you," replied the 
Fox; "but before I depart I will give you one piece of 
counsel. Beware of these two things: buy no gallows 
flesh, and sit not on the brink of a well!" With these 
words it ran into the forest. 

The young Prince thought, "Ah, that is a wonderful 
animal, with some strange fancies! Who would buy 
gallows flesh? And I don't see the pleasure of sitting 
on the brink of a well!" 

Onward he rode with his beautiful companion, and 
by chance the way led him through the village where 
his two brothers had stopped. There he found a great 
stir and uproar; and when he asked the reason he was 
told that two persons were about to be hanged. 

When he came nearer he saw that they were his two 
brothers, who had done some villainous deeds, and 
spent all their money. He inquired if they could not 
be freed, and was told by the people that he might buy 
them off if he would, but they were not worth his gold, 
and deserved nothing but hanging. Nevertheless, he 
did not hesitate, but paid down the money, and his 
two brothers were released. 

After this they all four set out in company, and soon 
came to the forest where they had first met the Fox; 



200 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

and as it was cool and pleasant beneath the trees, while 
the sun had been very hot, the two brothers said, " Come, 
let us rest awhile here by this well, and eat and drink." 

The youngest brother consented, forgetting in the 
heat of conversation the warning he had received, and 
feeling no anxiety. But all at once the brothers threw 
him backwards into the well, and taking the maiden, 
the horse, and the bird, went home to their father. 

"We bring you," said they to him, "not only the 
golden bird but also the golden horse and the Princess 
of the golden castle." There was great joy over their 
arrival; but the horse would not eat, the bird would 
not sing, and the maiden would not speak, but sat and 
wept bitterly. 

The youngest brother, however, was not dead. 
The well, by great good luck, was dry, and he fell upon 
soft moss without any injury; but he could not get out 
again. Even in this necessity the faithful Fox did not 
leave him, but soon came up, and scolded him for not 
following his advice. "Still, I cannot forsake you," 
said he; "I will again help you into daylight. Hold 
fast upon my tail, and I will draw you up to the top." 

When this was done the Fox said, "You are not 
yet out of danger, for your brothers are not sure of your 
death, and have set watchers all round the forest, who 
are to kill you if they should see you." 

The youth thereupon changed clothes with a poor 
old man who was sitting near, and in that guise went 
to the King's palace. Nobody knew him; but instantly 
the bird began to sing, the horse began to eat, and the 
beautiful maiden ceased weeping. Bewildered at this 
change, the King asked what it meant. "I know not," 



THE GOLDEN BIRD 201 

replied the maiden; "but I who was sad am now gay, 
for I feel as if my true husband were returned." 

Then she told him all that had happened, although 
the other brothers had threatened her with death if 
she disclosed anything. And the King summoned before 
him all the people who were in the castle, and among 
them came the poor youth, dressed as a begger, in his 
rags; but the maiden knew him, and fell upon his neck. 
The wicked brothers were seized and put to death; 
but the youngest married the Princess, and succeeded 
to the King's inheritance. 

But what had happened to the poor Fox? Long 
after, the Prince went once again into the wood. The 
Fox met him, and said, "You have now everything 
that you can desire, but to my misfortune there is no 
end, although it lies in your power to release me." And 
with tears he begged him to cut off his head and feet. 
At last the Prince did so; and scarcely was it accom- 
plished when the Fox became a m^an, who was no other 
than the brother of the Princess, delivered at length 
from the charm which bound him. From that day 
nothing was ever wanting to the happiness of the Hero 
of the Golden Bird. 



THE POOR MILLER'S BOY 
AND THE CAT 

Once upon a time there lived in a mill an old Miller 
who had neither wife nor children, but three apprentices 
instead; and after they had been with him several 
years he said to them one day: *T am old, and shall 
retire from business soon. Do you all go out, and which- 
ever of you brings me home the best horse, to him will 
I give the mill, and, moreover, he shall attend me in my 
last illness." 

The third of the apprentices was a small lad, looked 
upon as foolish by the others, who despised him so much 
that they did not intend he should ever have the mill, 
even after them. But all three went out together, and 
as soon as they got away from the village the two said 
to the stupid Hans: "You may as well remain here. 
In all your lifetime you will never find a horse." 

Nevertheless Hans went with them, and when night 
came on they arrived at a cave where they lay down to 
sleep. The two clever apprentices waited till Hans 
was fast asleep, and then they got up and walked off, 
leaving Hans snoring. Now they thought they had 
done a very clever thing, but we shall see how they fared. 

By and by the sun arose and awoke Hans, who, when 
he found himself lying in a deep cavern, peeped all 
around him and exclaimed, "Oh, Heavens! Where have 
I got to?" 

He soon got up and scrambled out of the cave into 
the forest, thinking to himself, " Here I am all alone 

202 



THE POOR MILLER'S BOY AND THE CAT 203 

What shall I do to get a horse?" While he thought, 
a little tortoise-shell Cat came up, and asked, in a most 
friendly manner, "Where are you going, Hans?" 

"Ah! you cannot help me," said Hans. 

"Yes, I know very well what you wish," replied the 
Cat; "you want a fine horse. Come with me, and for 
seven years be my faithful servant, and then I will give 
you a handsomer steed than you ever saw." 

"Well," thought Hans to himself, "this is a wonderful 
Cat! But still I may as well see if this will be true." 

So the Cat took him into her enchanted castle, where 
there were many other cats who waited upon her, jimip- 
ing quickly up and down the steps, and bustling about 
merry and happy. In the evening when they sat down 
to table three cats had to make music; one played the 
bassoon, a second the violin, and a third blew a trumpet 
so loudly that his cheeks seemed as if they would burst. 
When they had finished dinner the table was drawn 
away, and the Cat said, "Now, Hans, come and dance 
with me." 

"No, no!" replied he, "I won't dance with a cat! 
I never learned how!" 

"Then take him to bed," cried the Cat to her attend- 
ants; and they lighted him at once to his sleeping 
apartment, where one drew off his shoes, and another 
his stockings, while a third blew out the light. The 
following morning the servant cats made their appear- 
ance again, and helped him out of bed. One drew on 
his stockings, another tied his garters, a third fetched 
his shoes, a fourth washed him, and a fifth wiped his 
face with her tail. 

' ' That was done well and gently, ' ' said Hans to the last. 



204 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

But all day long Hans had to cut wood for the Cat, 
and for that purpose he had an ax of silver and wedges 
and saws of the same metal, while the mallet was made 
of copper. 

Here Hans remained, making himself useful. Every 
day he had good eating and drinking, but he saw nobody 
except the tortoise-shell Cat and her attendants. One 
day the Cat said to him, "Go and mow my meadows 
and dry the grass well," and she gave him a scythe of 
silver and a whetstone of gold, which she bade him bring 
back safe. Hans went off and did what he was told; 
and when the work was finished he took home the scythe, 
whetstone, and hay, and asked the Cat if she would not 
now give him his reward. 

"No," said the Cat, "you must first do several things 
for me. Here are beams of silver, carpenter's ax, square, 
and all that is necessary, all of silver, and of these you 
must first build me a small house." 

Hans built it, and when it was done he reminded the 
Cat he had still no horse. However, his seven years 
had passed like six months. 

The Cat now asked him whether he wished to see 
her horses. 

"Yes," said Hans. 

So they went out to the small house, and as they 
opened the door there stood twelve horses, very proud 
and shining, pawing the ground impatiently. Hans 
rejoiced to see them, but as soon as he had looked at 
them for a minute the Cat gave him his dinner and said: 
"Go home; I shall not give you your horse to take with 
you, but in three days I will come to you and bring it 
with me." 



THE POOR MILLER'S BOY AND THE CAT 205 

So Hans walked off, and the cats showed him the 
way to the mill; but as they had not furnished him with 
new clothes, he was forced to go in the old ragged ones 
he had taken with him, which during the seven years 
had become much too short for him. 

When he arrived at home he found the two other 
apprentices had preceded him, and each had brought a 
horse; but one was blind and the other lame. 

"Where is your horse, Hans?" inquired they. 

"It will follow me in three days," he replied. 

At that they laughed, and cried, "Yes, Hans, and 
when it does come it will be something wonderful, no 
doubt." 

Hans then went into the parlor, but the old Miller 
said he should not sit at table because he was so ragged 
and dirty; they would be ashamed of him if any one 
came in. So they gave him something to eat out of 
doors, and when bedtime came the two apprentices 
refused Hans a share of the bed, and he was obliged to 
creep into the goose coop and stretch himself upon some 
hard straw. The next morning was the third day men- 
tioned by the Cat, and as soon as Hans was up there 
came a carriage drawn by six horses, which shone in the 
sun, and a servant besides, who led a seventh horse for 
the poor miller's boy. Out of the carriage stepped a 
beautiful Princess, who went into the mill, and she was 
the tortoise-shell Cat whom poor Hans had served for 
seven years. 

She asked the Miller where the mill boy and drudge 
was, and he answered: "We could not take him into 
the mill, he was so ragged and dirty; he lies now in the 
goose coop." 



2o6 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

The Princess bade him fetch Hans, but in order to 
come the poor fellow had to hold together his little 
smock frock to cover himself. 

Then the servant drew forth some elegant clothes, 
and after washing Hans put them on him, and no king 
could have looked more handsome. 

Thereupon the Princess wished to see the horses 
the other apprentices had brought home, and one was 
blind and the other lame. When she had seen them she 
ordered her servant to bring the horse he had in his keep- 
ing, and as soon as the Miller saw it he declared that 
such an animal had never before been in his yard. 

"It belongs to the youngest apprentice," said the 
Princess. 

"And the mill too," said the Miller. But the Princess 
said he might keep the mill and the horse as well. With 
these words she placed her faithful Hans in the carriage 
with her, and drove away. They went first to the little 
house which Hans had built with the silver tools, and 
which had become a noble castle, wherein everything 
was of gold and silver. There the Princess married 
him, and he was so very rich that he had enough for 
all his life. 

After this let no one ever say that one who is silly 
can never become a person of importance. 



THE KING OF THE GOLDEN MOUNTAIN 

A certain Merchant had two children, a boy and a 
girl, who at the time our tale begins were both so little 
that they could not run alone. This Merchant had 
sent away two richly laden vessels in which he had em- 
barked all his property, and, just as he was hoping to 
gain much money by their voyage, the news came that 
both ships had sunk to the bottom of the sea. Thus 
instead of a rich merchant, he became a poor man, and 
had nothing left but a field near the town where he dwelt, 
and therein, to divert his thoughts from his loss for a 
while, he went to walk. While he paced to and fro 
there suddenly appeared a little black Dwarf, who asked 
him the reason of his sorrowful looks, and what he took 
so much to heart. 

"If you are able to help me," said the Merchant 
"I will tell you." 

"Who knows," replied the Dwarf, "whether I can 
or no?" 

So then the Merchant told him what had happened: 
how all his wealth was sunk at the bottom of the sea, 
and nothing remained to him but this one field. 

"Do not grieve yourself any longer," said the Dwarf; 
"for if you will promise to bring me here, in twelve years, 
whatever first rubs itself against your leg on your return 
home, you shall have all the money you can require." 
The Merchant thought it would be his dog that would 
meet him first, for just then he did not remember his 
children, so he gave the little black man his written and 

207 



2o8 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

sealed promise to the bargain, and returned to his home. 

Just as he came within sight of the house his httle 
boy saw him, and was so glad that he waddled up to 
him and clasped him by the knees. The father was 
frightened, for his promise occurred to him, and he 
knew now what he had sworn to; but still, as he found 
no money in his coffers, he imagined it was only a joke 
on the part of the Dwarf. A month afterwards, how- 
ever, he went to his garret to gather together some old 
tin to sell, and there he saw a great heap of gold. Now 
was he again prosperous, and bought and sold and 
became a great merchant, as he had been before. 

Meanwhile his boy grew up clever and sensible, and 
the nearer he came to the age of twelve years the sadder 
became his father, till people could see the traces of his 
anguish in his face. One day the son asked him what 
was amiss. The father would not tell him at first, but at 
last he related how without knowing it he had sold him 
to a little black Dwarf for a heap of money, and how 
he had set his seal and name to the bargain, so that 
when twelve years had passed he must deliver him up. 

"My father," answered the son, "do not be sorry 
about such a matter. All will yet go well, for the Dwarf 
can have no power over me." 

After this the son had himself blessed by a priest, 
and when the hour came he and his father went together 
to the field, where the son drew a circle, within which 
they both placed themselves. 

Presently came the black Dwarf, and asked, "Have 
you brought with you what you promised?" 

The father was silent, but the son replied, "What 
do you want here?" 



THE KING OF THE GOLDEN MOUNTAIN 209 

"I came to speak with your father, and not with 
you," said the Dwarf. 

"You have deceived and betrayed my father," 
said the son. "Give up the paper you extorted from 
him." 

"No! I will not surrender my rights!" replied the 
Dwarf. 

Then they consulted together for some time, and at 
last they agreed that the son, because he would not 
obey the Dwarf and did not any longer belong to his 
father, should place himself in an open boat which lay 
upon the waters, and that his father should then give 
the vessel a push that it might float whither it would. 
The son, therefore, took leave of his Father, and set 
himself in the boat, which the father pushed off; but, un- 
happily, the boat turned bottom upwards with the force 
of the shock, and the father was forced to return home 
believing his son was dead, which grieved him sorely. 

The boat, however, did not sink, but floated quietly 
away with the youth clinging to it, till at length it 
touched on an unknown land and remained there. The 
youth then scrambled on shore, and saw, just opposite, 
a fine castle, toward which he hurried. As soon as he 
entered he found that it was an enchanted palace, and 
he walked through all the rooms, and found them all 
empty, till he came to the last, in which he discovered 
a snake curling itself round and round. This snake, 
however, was an enchanted maiden. She was overjoyed 
to see the youth enter, and said to him, "Are you come 
to deliver me? For twelve years have I waited for you, 
for this kingdom is enchanted, and you must free it from 
the spell." 

14 



2IO GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

"How can I do that?" he asked. 

"This night," she replied, "twelve Black Dwarfs 
will come, laden with chains; and they will ask you 
what you do here; but, mind, give them no answer, 
and let them do what they will to you. They will tor- 
ment you, beat and poke you about, but let all this 
happen without a word on your part and then they 
must be off again. The second night twelve others 
will come, and the third night four-and-twenty, and these 
last will cut off your head; but at midnight their power 
passes away, and if you restrain yourself till then, and 
never speak a word, I am saved. Afterwards I will 
come to you with a flask which contains the water of 
life, and with this I will sprinkle you, that you shall 
regain your breath and be as healthy and well as before." 

"I will save you willingly," he replied. 

Now everything happened as the snake said. The 
Black Dwarfs failed to compel him to speak, and the 
third night the snake became a beautiful Princess, and 
came with the water of life, as she had said, and restored 
the youth to life. Then she fell upon his neck and 
kissed him, and through all the castle there were joy 
and gladness. Soon their wedding was celebrated, and 
the Merchant's son became the King of the Golden 
Mountain. 

The happy pair lived in great contentment, and in 
course of time the Queen bore a son, and now when 
eight years had passed over their heads the King be- 
thought himself of his father, and his heart was so moved 
with the recollection that he wished to visit him. The 
Queen would not at first hear of such a thing, and said, 
" I know the journey will cause misfortune to me." But 



THE KING OF THE GOLDEN MOUNTAIN 211 

he talked of it so often that at length she was obliged 
to consent. At his departure she gave him a wishing 
ring, and said, "Take this ring and wear it on your 
finger, and then wherever you wish to be, there you wiU 
find yourself. But this you must promise me, that you 
will not wish me to leave here to visit your father's 
house." 

The King promised, and putting the ring on his finger 
he wished himself before the town where his father 
dwelt. At the same moment he found himself there, 
and tried to go into the town, but as he came to the gate 
the guards would not let him pass, because he wore 
clothes so peculiar, and so rich and magnificent. There- 
upon he climbed up a hill where a shepherd was watching 
sheep, and with him he changed clothes, and thus in 
the rough smock passed into the town unquestioned. 

When he came to his father's house he was not recog- 
nized, and the Merchant would not believe it was his 
son, although he said he certainly once had a son, but 
that he had been dead some years. Still, because he 
saw he was a poor thirsty shepherd, he willingly gave 
him a plate of food. At last the youth asked his parents, 
"Do you know of any mark on my body whereby you 
will recognize me? For mdeed I am your true son." 

"Yes," said the mother; "our son had a raspberry 
mark under his right arm." 

Instantly he drew his shirt back from his arm, and 
there they saw the raspberry mark, so that they no 
longer doubted that he was their son. Then he told 
them that he was King of the Golden Mountain, and 
had a beautiful Princess for his wife, and a child seven 
years old. 



212 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

But the Merchant laughed at him, saying, "Never 
can this be true! Here is a fine King indeed, who comes 
in a ragged shepherd's smock!" 

This made the son very angry; and, without consid- 
eration, he turned round his ring and wished both his 
child and wife were with him. In a moment they 
appeared; but the Queen wept, and complained that 
he had broken his promise, and brought misfortune 
upon her. The King told her he had done it without 
thought and with no bad intention; and she appeared 
to be reconciled, but, in reality, she had evil in her heart. 

After a while he took her to the field, out of the town, 
and showed her the stream where his boat had been 
overturned, and then, feeHng tired, he said to her, "I 
am weary; so rest yourself awhile, and I will lay my 
head in your lap and go to sleep." He did so, and the 
Queen waited quietly till he was sound asleep, and then 
she drew the ring off his finger, and withdrew the foot 
that was under him, leaving only the slipper. There- 
upon she took her child in her arms, and wished herself 
back in her kingdom. 

When, then, the King awoke, he found himself all 
alone, his wife and child gone, and the ring from his 
finger too. The slipper only was there as a token. 

"Home to your parents," said he to himself, "you 
cannot go ; they will say you are a magician ; so you 
must travel about till you come again to your kingdom." 

So he went away, and by and by came to a moun- 
tain, before which three Giants stood, and contended 
with each other because they knew not how to divide 
their paternal inheritance. As soon as they saw the 
young man passing by they called to him and said, 



THE KING OF THE GOLDEN MOUNTAIN 213 

"Come, little men have often wise heads: you shall 
divide our patrimony." 

Now this inheritance consisted, first, of a sword, 
and if one took it into his hand and said, "Heads off 
all round, but not mine!" instantly every head near 
lay on the ground; second, of a cloak which rendered 
its wearer invisible; and third, of a pair of boots which 
were capable of taking their wearer wherever he wished. 

The youth therefore said, ''Give me these three 
things, that I may prove them whether they are in good 
order or not." So they gave him the cloak, and as soon 
as he put it on he became invisible, in the form of a fly. 
He soon took his old form again and said, "The cloak 
is good; now give me the sword." 

"Oh, no!" said the Giants, "we will not give you 
that. For if you should say, 'Heads off all round, but 
not mine!' all our heads would fall off, and you alone 
would have one." Still they gave it to him on condition 
that he should prove it on a tree. This he did, and the 
sword cut the trunk in two as if it were a straw. 

Then he wished to have the boots, but the Giants 
said, "No, we will not give them away; for if you 
should pull them on, and wish yourself on the svimmit 
of this mountain, we would stand here without any- 
thing!" But the youth said that he would not do that, 
and so they gave him the boots, and, as he now had 
all three things, he thought of nothing but his wife and 
child; and he said, as if to himself, "Ah! were I upon 
the Golden Mountain!" Immediately he disappeared 
from the sight of the Giants, and thus divided their 
inheritance. 

As he came near his castle he heard great rejoicings, 



214 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

and the notes of flutes and fiddles, and the people told 
him that his wife was about to celebrate her wedding 
with another husband. This put him in a passion, and 
he exclaimed, "False woman! She deceived and left 
me while I slept!" 

Then he put on the cloak and rendered himself invisi- 
ble while he entered the castle. In the hall he saw a 
large table spread out with costly delicacies, and guests 
eating and drinking, singing and laughing. In their 
midst sat the Queen, dressed in splendid clothes, upon 
a magnificent throne, with a crown upon her head. 
The true King placed himself behind her; but nobody- 
saw him; and when she placed meat upon her plate he 
took it up and ate it himself; and each glass of wine 
which she poured for herself he drank, and so it went 
on — neither plate nor glass stayed in its place; each 
one disappeared in a moment. 

This disturbed the Queen very much, and put her 
to shame, so that at length she arose, and went to her 
own chamber to weep; but here also he followed her. 
There she called out, "Is this the devil who persecutes 
me? Or did my deliverer never come?" 

At these words he struck her on the cheek and cried, 
"Did thy deliverer never come? He is beside thee, 
thou traitress! Have I deserved this of thee?" 

Then he rendered himself visible again, and, going 
into the hall, he cried, "The wedding is over! The 
true King is come!" 

Then the kings, princes, and counselors who were 
assembled mocked him and jeered him; but he gave 
them short answers, and asked, "Will you be off or not?" 

Then they tried to catch and imprison him; but he 



THE KING OF THE GOLDEN MOUNTAIN 215 

drew his sword, and said, "Heads off all round, but not 
mine!" So all their heads rolled down the hill, and he 
was left master alone, and became once more "King 
of the Golden Mountain." 



HANSEL AND GRETHEL 

Once upon a time there dwelt near a large wood a 
poor woodcutter with his wife and two children by his 
former marriage, a little boy called Hansel, and a girl 
named Grethel. He had little enough to break or bite, 
and once, when there was a great famine in the land, 
he could not procure even his daily bread. As he lay 
thinking in his bed one night, rolling about for trouble, 
he groaned, and said to his wife, "What will become 
of us? How can we feed our children when we no 
longer have anything to eat even for ourselves?" 

" I will tell you, my husband," answered she. "Quite 
early in the morning we will lead them away into the 
thickest part of the wood, and there make them a fire, 
and give them each a little piece of bread; then we 
will go to our work and leave them alone, so they will 
not find their way home again, and we shall be freed 
from them." 

"No, wife," replied he, "that I can never do; how 
can I bring my heart to leave my children all alone in 
the wood, where the wild beasts will soon come and 
tear them to pieces?" 

"Oh, you simpleton!" said she, "then we must all 
four die of hunger; you had better plane the coffins for 
us." And she left him no peace till he consented. "Ah, 
but I shall regret the poor children," said the man. 

The two children, however, had not gone to sleep 
for very hunger, and so they overheard what their 
stepmother said to their father. 

216 



HANSEL AND GRETHEL 217 

Grethel wept bitterly, and said to Hansel, "What 
will become of us?" 

"Be quiet, Grethel," said he; "do not cry. I will 
help you." 

And as soon as their parents had fallen asleep he 
got up, put on his coat, and, unbarring the back door, 
slipped out. The moon shone brightly, and the white 
pebbles which lay before the door glittered so, they 
seemed like silver pieces. Hansel stooped down, and put 
as many into his pocket as it would hold, and then 
going back he said to Grethel, "Be comforted, dear 
sister, and sleep in peace. God will not forsake us." 
And so saying, he went to bed again. 

The next morning, before the sun arose, the wife 
went and awoke the two children. "Get up, you lazy 
things; we are going into the forest to chop wood." 
Then she gave them each a piece of bread, saying, 
"There is something for your dinner; do not eat it before 
the time, for you will get nothing else." 

Grethel took the bread in her apron, for Hansel's 
pocket was full of pebbles; and so they all set out upon 
their way. When they had gone a little distance Hansel 
stood still, and peeped back at the house; and this he 
repeated several times, till his father said, "Hansel, 
what are you looking at, and why do you lag behind? 
Take care, and remember how to usf your legs." 

"Ah! father," said Hansel, "I am looking at my 
white cat sitting upon the roof of the house, and trying 
to say good-by to me." 

"You simpleton!" said the wife, "that is not a cat; 
it is only the sun shining on the white chimney." 

But in reality Hansel was not looking at a cat; 



2i8 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

every time he stopped he dropped a pebble out of his 
pocket upon the path. 

When they came to the middle of the forest the 
father told the children to collect wood, and he would 
make them a fire, so that they should not be cold So 
Hansel and Grethel gathered together quite a little 
mountain of twigs. Then they set fire to them, and 
as the flame burnt up high the wife said, "Now, you 
children, lie down near the fire and rest yourselves, 
while we go into the forest and chop wood; when we 
are ready, I will come and fetch you." 

Hansel and Grethel sat down by the fire, and when 
it was noon each ate the piece of bread, and, because 
they could hear the blows of an ax, they thought their 
father was near; but it was not an ax, but a branch 
which he had bound to a withered tree, so as to be 
blown to and fro by the wind. They waited so long 
that at last their eyes closed from weariness, and they 
fell fast asleep. 

When they awoke it was quite dark, and Grethel 
began to cry: "How shall we get out of the wood?" 

But Hansel tried to comfort her by saying, "Wait 
a little while till the moon rises, and then we shall quickly 
find the way." 

The moon soon shone forth, and Hansel, taking his 
sister's hand, followed the pebbles, which glittered 
like new-coined silver pieces, and showed them the 
path. All night long they walked on, and as day broke 
they came to their father's house. They knocked at 
the door, and when the wife opened it, and saw Hansel 
and Grethel, she exclaimed, "You wicked children! 
Why did you sleep so long in the wood? We thought 



HANSEL AND GRETHEL 219 

you were never coming home again." But their father 
was very glad, for it had grieved his heart to leave them 
all alone 

Not long afterwards there was again great scarcity 
in every comer of the land; and one night the children 
overheard their stepmother saying to their father, 
"Everything is again eaten. We have only half a loaf 
left, and then the song is ended: the children must go. 
We will take them deeper into the wood, so that they 
may not find the way out again; it is the only means 
of escape for us." 

But her husband felt heavy at heart, and thought, 
"It were better to share the last crust with the children." 
His wife, however, would listen to nothing that he said, 
and scolded and reproached him without end. 

He who says A must say B too ; and he who consents 
the first time must also the second. 

The children, however, had heard the conversation 
as they lay awake, and as soon as the old people went 
to sleep Hansel got up, intending to pick up some pebbles 
as before; but the wife had locked the door, so that he 
could not get out. Nevertheless he comforted Grethel, 
saying, "Do not cry; sleep in quiet; the good God 
will not forsake us." 

Early in the morning the stepmother came and 
pulled them out of bed, and gave them each a slice 
of bread, which was still smaller than the former piece. 
On the way Hansel broke his in his pocket, and, 
stopping every now and then, dropped a crumb upon 
the path. 

"Hansel, why do you stop and look about?" said 
the father. "Keep in the path." 



220 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

"I am looking at my little dove," answered Hansel, 
"nodding a good-by to me." 

"Simpleton!" said the wife, "that is no dove, but 
only the sun shining on the chimney." 

But Hansel still kept dropping crumbs as he went along. 

The stepmother led the children deep into the 
wood, where they had never been before, and there, 
making an immense fire, she said to them, "Sit down 
here and rest, and when you feel tired you can sleep 
for a little while. We are going into the forest to hew 
wood, and in the evening, when we are ready, we will 
come and fetch you." 

When noon came Grethel shared her bread with 
Hansel, who had strewn his on the path. Then they 
went to sleep; but the evening arrived, and no one 
came to the poor children. In the dark night they 
awoke, and Hansel comforted his sister by saying, 
"Only wait, Grethel, till the moon comes out, then we 
shall see the crumbs of bread which I have dropped, 
and they will show us the way home." 

When the moon shone they got up, but they could 
not see any crumbs, for the thousands of birds which 
had been flying about in the woods and fields had picked 
them all up. 

Hansel kept saying to Grethel, "We shall soon find 
the way"; but they did not, and they walked the whole 
night long, and the next day, but still they did not come 
out of the wood. And they got very hungry, for they 
had nothing to eat but two or three berries which they 
found upon the bushes. As they were now so tired 
they could not drag themselves along any farther, they 
lay down under a tree and went to sleep. 



HANSEL AND GRETHEL 221 

It was now the third morning since they had left 
their father's house, and they still walked on; but they 
only got deeper and deeper into the wood, and Hansel 
saw that if help did not come very soon they would die 
of hunger. When it was noon they saw a beautiful snow- 
white bird sitting upon a bough, which sang so sweetly 
that they stood still and listened to it. It soon finished 
its song, and spreading its wings flew off; and they fol- 
lowed it until it arrived at a cottage, upon the roof of 
which it perched; and when they went close up to it 
they saw that the cottage was made of bread and cakes, 
and the window panes were of clear sugar. 

"We will set to work on that,'* said Hansel, "and have 
a glorious feast. I will eat a piece of the roof, and you 
can eat the window; it will taste sweet." So Hansel 
reached up and broke a piece off the roof, in order to see 
how it tasted, while Grethel stepped up to the window and 
began to bite it. Then a sweet voice called out in the room, 
"Tip-tap, tip-tap, who raps at my door?" and the 
children answered, "The wind, the wind, the child of 
heaven"; and they went on eating without interruption. 

Hansel thought the roof tasted very nice, and so he 
tore off a great piece. Grethel broke a large round pane 
out of the window, and sat down quite contentedly. 
Just then the door opened, and a very old woman, 
walking upon crutches, came out. Hansel and Grethel 
were so frightened that they let fall what they had in 
their hands; but the old woman, nodding her head, 
said, "Ah, you dear children, what has brought you 
here? Come in and stay with me, and no harm shall 
befall you." And so saying, she took them both by the 
hand and led them into her cottage. 



222 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

A good meal of milk and pancakes, with sugar, apples, 
and nuts, was spread on the table, and in the back room 
were two nice little beds, covered with white, where 
Hansel and Grethel laid themselves down, and thought 
themselves in heaven. 

The old woman had behaved very kindly to them, 
but in reality she was a wicked Witch who waylaid chil- 
dren, and built the bread house in order to entice them 
in; but as soon as they were in her power she killed 
them, cooked and ate them, and made a great festival 
of the day. 

Witches have red eyes and cannot see very far; 
but they have a fine sense of smell, like wild beasts, so 
that they know when children approach them. When 
Hansel and Grethel came near the Witch's house she 
had laughed wickedly, saying, "Here come two who 
shall not escape me." And early in the morning, before 
they awoke, she went up to them, and saw how lovingly 
they lay sleeping, with their chubby red cheeks; and 
she mumbled to herself, "That will be a good bite." 

Then she took up Hansel with her shriveled hand, 
and shut him up in a little stable with a grated door; 
and although he screamed loudly it was of no use. Then 
she went to Grethel, and, shaking her till she awoke, 
she said, " Get up, you lazy thing, and fetch some water 
to cook something good for your brother, who must 
remain in that stall and get fat; when he is fat enough 
I shall eat him." Grethel began to cry, but it was all 
useless, for the old Witch made her do as she wished. 
So a nice meal was cooked for Hansel, but Grethel got 
nothing but a crab's shell. 

Every morning the old Witch came to the stable and 



HANSEL AND GRETHEL 223 

said, "Hansel, stretch out your finger that I may feel 
whether you are getting fat." But Hansel used to 
stretch out a bone, and the old woman, having very bad 
sight, thought it was his finger, and wondered very much 
that it did not get fat. When four weeks had passed, 
and Hansel still kept lean, she lost all her patience and 
would not wait any longer. 

"Grethel," she called out in a passion, "get some 
water quickly; be Hansel fat or lean, to-morrow I will 
kill and cook him." Oh, how the poor little sister 
grieved as she had to fetch the water, and how fast the 
tears ran down her cheeks! 

"Dear good God, help us now!" she exclaimed. 
"Had we only been eaten by the wild beasts in the wood 
we should have died together." 

But the old Witch called out, "Leave off that noise; 
it will not help you a bit." 

So early in the morning Grethel was forced to go out 
and fill the cauldron, and make a fire. "First we will 
bake, however," said the old woman; "I have already 
heated the oven and kneaded the dough"; and so saying 
she pushed poor Grethel up to the oven, out of which 
the flames were darting fiercely. "Creep in," said the 
Witch, "and see if it is hot enough, and then we will 
put in the bread." But she intended when Grethel 
got in to shut up the oven and let her bake, so that she 
might eat her as well as Hansel. 

Grethel saw what her thoughts were, and said, "I 
do not know how to do it. How shall I get in?" 

"You stupid goose," said the Witch, "the opening 
is big enough. See, I could even get in myself!" and she 
got up and put her head into the oven. Then Grethel 



224 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

gave her a push, so that she fell right in, and then, 
shutting the iron door, she bolted it. Oh! how horribly 
the old Witch howled! But Grethel ran away, and left 
her to burn to ashes. 

Now she ran to Hansel, and opening his door called 
out, "Hansel, we are saved! The old Witch is dead!" 

So he sprang out, like a bird out of his cage when the 
door is opened; and they were so glad that they fell 
upon each other's neck, and kissed each other over and 
over again. And now, as there was nothing to fear, 
they went into the Witch's house, where in every corner 
were chests full of pearls and precious stones. 

"These are better than pebbles," said Hansel, put- 
ting as many into his pocket as it would hold; and 
Grethel said, "I will take some home too," and filled her 
apron full. 

"We must be off now," said Hansel, "and get out of 
this bewitched forest." 

When they had walked for two hours they came 
to a large piece of water. "We cannot get over," said 
Hansel. "I can see no bridge at all." 

"And there is no boat, either," said Grethel; "but 
there swims a white duck; I will ask her to help us over." 
And she sang: 

"Little duck, good little duck, 

Grethel and Hansel, here we stand, 
There is neither plank nor bridge. 
Take us on your back to land." 

So the duck came to them, and Hansel seated himself 
on its back and bade his sister sit behind him. 

"No," answered Grethel, "that will be too much for 
the little duck; she shall take us over one at a time." 



HANSEL AND GRETHEL 225 

This the good little bird did, and when both were 
happily arrived on the other side, and had gone a little 
way, they came to a well-known wood, which they 
knew the better every step they went, and at last they 
saw their father's house. Then they began to run, 
and, bursting into the parlor, they fell on their father's 
neck. He had not had one happy hour since he had 
left the children in the forest; and his wife was dead. 
Grethel shook her apron, and the pearls and precious 
stones rolled out upon the floor, and Hansel threw down 
one handful after the other out of his pocket. Then 
all their sorrows were ended, and they lived together 
in great happiness. 

My tale is done. There runs a mouse; whoever 
catches her may make a big cap out of her fur. 



15 



LITTLE SNOW-WHITE 

0nce upon a time in the depth of winter, when the 
flakes of snow were faUing hke feathers from the clouds, 
a Queen sat sewing at her palace window, which had 
an ebony black frame. While she was thus engaged 
and looking out at the snow, she pricked her finger, and 
three drops of blood fell upon the snow. Because the 
red looked so well upon the white, she thought to her- 
self, "Would that I had a child as white as this snow, as 
red as this blood, and as black as the wood of this frame! " 
Soon afterwards a little daughter was bom to her, who 
was as white as snow and as red as blood and whose 
hair was as black as ebony, and thence she was named 
"Snow-White." But when the child was bom the 
mother died. 

About a year afterward the King married another 
wife, who was very beautiful, but so proud and haughty 
that she could not bear any one to be better looking than 
herself. She possessed a wonderful mirror, and when 
she stepped before it and said, 

"Oh, mirror, mirror on the wall. 
Who is the fairest of us all?" 
it replied — 

"Thou art the fairest, lady Queen." 

Then she was pleased, for she knew that the mirror 
spoke only the truth. 

Little Snow-White grew up, and became constantly 
prettier. When she was seven years old her complexion 
was as clear as the noonday, and more beautiful than 

326 



LITTLE SNOW-WHITE 22I 

that of the Queen herself. When the Queen now asked 
her mirror — 

"Oh, mirror, mirror on the wall, 
Who is the fairest of us all?" 
it replied — 

"Thou wert the fairest, lady Queen; 
Snow- White is fairest now, I ween." 

This answer so frightened the Queen that she became 
quite green with envy. From that hour, each time she 
perceived Snow- White her heart grew more hardened 
against her, and she hated the maiden. 

Her envy and jealousy increased so that she had no 
rest, day or night. Finally she called a Huntsman and 
said, "Take the child away into the forest. I wish never 
to look upon her again. You must kill her, and bring 
me her heart for a token." The Huntsman listened, 
and took the maiden away; but when he drew out his 
knife to kill her, she began to cry, saying, "Ah, dear 
Huntsman, spare my life! I will run into the deep 
forest, and never come home again." 

This speech softened the Huntsman's heart, and her 
beauty so touched him that he had pity on her and said, 
"Well, run away then, poor child." But he thought to 
himself, "The wild beasts will soon devour you." Still, 
he felt as if a stone had been taken from his heart because 
her death was not to be by his hand. Just at that 
moment a young boar came running past, and as soon 
as he clapped eyes upon it the Huntsman stabbed it, 
and took its heart and carried it to the Queen for a token 
of his deed. 

But now poor little Snow- White was left motherless 
and alone, and, overcome with grief, she was bewildered 



228 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

at the sight of so many trees, and knew not which way 
to turn. She set off running, and ran over stones and 
through thorns, and wild beasts sprang up as she passed 
them, but they did her no harm. She ran on till her feet 
refused to go farther. As it was getting dark she saw 
a little house near, and entered it to rest. In this cot- 
tage everything was very small, but neater and cleaner 
than I can tell you. In the middle stood a little table 
with a white cloth over it, and seven little plates upon 
it, each plate having beside it a spoon and a knife and 
fork, and there were also seven little mugs. Against 
the wall were seven little beds ranged in a row, each 
covered with a snow-white counterpane. Little Snow- 
White, being both hungry and thirsty, ate a little morsel 
of porridge out of each plate, and drank a drop or two 
of wine out of each glass, for she did not wish to take 
the whole share of any one. After that, because she 
was very tired, she lay down on one of the beds, but it 
did not suit; she tried another, but that was too long; 
a fourth was too short, a fifth too hard, but the seventh 
was just right, so she said a prayer, tucked herself in, 
and went to sleep. 

When it became quite dark the owners of the cottage 
came home. They were seven Dwarfs, who dug and 
delved for ore in the mountains. They first lighted 
seven little lamps, and perceived at once — for these 
illumined the whole cottage — that somebody had been 
there, for everything was not in the order in which they 
had left it. 

The first asked, "Who has been sitting on my chair?** 
The second, "Who has been eating off my plate?'* 
The third, "Who has been nibbhng at my bread?" 



LITTLE SNOW-WHITE 229 

The fourth, "Who has been at my porridge?" 

The fifth, "Who has been using my fork?" 

The sixth gnmibled out, "Who has been cutting with 
my knife?" 

The seventh said, "Who has been drinking out of 
my glass?" 

Then the first looked round and began again. "Who 
has been lying on my bed?" for he saw that the sheets 
were tumbled. At these words the others came, looked 
at their beds, and cried out too, "Some one has been 
lying in our beds!" 

But the seventh little man, nmning up to his, saw 
Snow- White sleeping in it; so he called his companions, 
who shouted with wonder and held up their seven lamps 
so that the light fell upon the maiden. "Oh, heavens! 
oh, heavens!" said they, "what a beauty she is!" and 
they were so much delighted that they would not awaken 
her, but left her to repose; and the seventh Dwarf, in 
whose bed she was, slept with each of his fellows one 
hour, and so passed the night. 

As soon as morning dawned Snow- White awoke, and 
was quite frightened when she saw the seven little men; 
but they were very friendly, and asked her what she was 
called. 

"My name is Snow- White," was her reply. 

"Why have you entered our cottage?" they asked. 

Then she told them how her stepmother had wished 
to have her killed, how the Huntsman had spared her 
life, and how she had wandered about the whole day 
until at last she had found their house. 

When her tale was finished the Dwarfs said, "Will 
you see after our household ; cook, make the beds, wash, 



230 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

sew, and knit for us, and keep everything in neat order? 
If so, we will keep you here, and you shall want for 
nothing." And Snow-White answered, "Yes, with all 
my heart and will." 

So she remained with them, and kept their house 
in order. In the mornings the Dwarfs went into the 
mountains and searched for copper and gold, and in 
the evenings they came home and their supper had to 
be ready for them. During the day the maiden was 
left alone. Therefore the good Dwarfs warned her and 
said, "Be on your guard against your stepmother, who 
will soon know of your being here; therefore let nobody 
enter the cottage." 

The Queen, meanwhile, supposing she had eaten the 
heart of her stepdaughter, did not think but that she 
was above all comparison the most beautiful of every one 
around. One day, stepping before her mirror, and said — 

"Oh, mirror, mirror on the wall, 
Who is the fairest of us all?" 

"Thou wert the fairest, lady Queen; 
Snow- White is fairest now, I ween. 
Amid the forest, darkly green, 
She lives with Dwarfs — the hills between.' 

This reply astounded her, for she knew that the mirror 
spoke the truth, and she perceived that the Huntsman 
had deceived her, and that Snow- White was still alive. 

So she thought and thought how she could accom- 
plish her purpose, for, so long as she was not the fairest 
in the whole country, jealousy left her no rest. 

At last a thought struck her, and she dyed her face 
and clothed herself as a peddler woman, so that no one 



LITTLE SNOW-WHITE 231 

could recognize her. In this disguise she went over 
the seven hills to the seven Dwarfs, knocked at the door 
of the hut, and called out, "Fine goods for sale! Beauti- 
ful goods for sale!" 

Snow- White peeped out of the window and said, 
"Good day, my good woman, what have you to sell?" 

"Fine goods, beautiful goods!" she replied. "Stay- 
laces of all colors"; and she held up a pair which was 
made of variegated silks. 

"I may let in this honest woman," thought Snow- 
White; and she unbolted the door and bargained for 
one pair of stay-laces. 

"You can't think, my dear, how it becomes you!** 
exclaimed the old woman. "Come, let me lace you 
properly." 

Snow- White suspected nothing, and let her do as she 
wished, but the old woman laced her up so quickly and 
so tightly that all her breath went, and she fell down 
like one dead. " Now," thought the old woman to her- 
self, hastening away, "now am I once more the most 
beautiful of all!" 

Not long after her departure, at eventide, the seven 
Dwarfs came home, and were much frightened at seeing 
their dear little maid lying on the ground, neither moving 
nor breathing, as if she were dead. They raised her up, 
and when they saw she was laced too tightly they cut 
the laces, and presently she began to breathe again, and 
little by little she revived. 

When the Dwarfs heard what had taken place, they 
said, "The old peddler woman was no other than your 
wicked stepmother; take more care, and let no one 
enter when we are not with you." 



2^2 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

Meanwhile the old Queen had reached home, and, 
going before her mirror, she repeated her usual words — 

"Oh, mirror, mirror on the wall, 
Who is the fairest of us all?" 

and it replied as before — 

"Thou wert the fairest, lady Queen; 
Snow- White is fairest now, I ween. 
Amid the forest, darkly green, 
She lives with Dwarfs — the hills between." 

As soon as it had finished, all her blood rushed to her 
heart, she was so frightened to hear that Snow-White 
was yet living. "But now," thought she to herself, 
"will I contrive something which shall destroy her com- 
pletely." Thus saying, she made a poisoned comb 
by witchcraft, and she disguised herself as an old widow. 
She went over the seven hills to the house of the seven 
Dwarfs, and, knocking at the door, called out. "Good 
wares to sell to-day!" 

Snow-White peeped out and said, "You must go 
further, for I dare not let you in." 

"But surely you may look," said the old woman, 
drawing out her poisoned comb and holding it up. The 
sight of this pleased the maiden so much that she allowed 
herself to be persuaded and opened the door. As soon 
as she had made a purchase the old woman said, "Now 
let me comb you properly," and Snow- White consented. 
But scarcely was the comb drawn through the hair when 
the poison began to work and the maiden soon fell down 
senseless. 

" You pattern of beauty," cried the wicked old Queen, 
"now it is all over with you! " and so saying she departed. 



LITTLE SNOW-WHITE 233 

Fortunately, evening soon came, and the seven Dwarfs 
returned. As soon as they saw Snow- White, lying as 
if dead upon the ground, they suspected the old Queen, 
and soon discovered the poisoned comb, and immediately 
drew it out. The maiden very soon revived and related 
all that had happened. Then they warned her again 
against the wicked stepmother, and bade her open the 
door to no one. 

Meanwhile the Queen on her arrival home had again 
consulted her mirror and received the same answer as 
before. This made her tremble and shake with rage 
and jealousy, and she swore Snow- White should die if 
it cost her her own life. Thereupon she went into an 
inner secret chamber where no one else could enter, and 
there made an apple of the most deep and subtle poison. 
Outwardly it looked nice enough, with one side so rosy 
it would make the mouth of every one who looked at 
it water; but whoever ate the smallest piece of it would 
surely die. As soon as the apple was ready, the old 
Queen again dyed her face, and clothed herself like a 
peasant's wife, and then over the seven mountains to 
the seven Dwarfs she made her way. 

She knocked at the door, and Snow- White stretched 
out her head and said, "I dare not let any one enter; 
the seven Dwarfs have forbidden me." 

"It is all the same to me," said the old woman, "I 
shall soon dispose of my apples. There, I will give you 
one." 

"No," answered Snow- White, "no, I dare not take 
it." 

"What! are you afraid of it?" cried the old woman. 
"There, see, I will cut the apple in halves; do you eat 



234 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

the red cheek, and I will eat the white." (The apple 
was so artfully made that the red cheek alone was 
poisoned.) 

Snow- White very much desired the beautiful apple, 
and when she saw the woman eating part of it she could 
no longer resist, but stretched out her hand and took the 
poisoned part. Scarcely had she placed a piece in her 
mouth when she fell down dead upon the ground. Then 
the Queen, looking at her with glittering eyes, and laugh- 
ing bitterly, exclaimed, "White as snow, red as blood, 
black as ebony! this time the Dwarfs cannot re-awaken 
you." 

When she reached home and consulted her mirror — 

"Oh, mirror, mirror on the wall, 
Who is the fairest of us all?" 

it answered — 

"Thou art the fairest, lady Queen." 

Then her envious heart was at rest, as peacefully as 
an envious heart can rest. 

When the little Dwarfs returned home in the evening 
they found Snow- White lying on the ground, and there 
appeared to be no life in her body: she seemed to be 
quite dead. They raised her up and searched if they 
could find anything poisonous; unlaced her, and even 
uncombed her hair, and washed her with water and with 
wine; but nothing availed: the dear child was really 
and truly dead. Then they laid her upon a bier, and 
all seven placed themselves around it, and wept and 
wept for three days without ceasing. Afterwards they 
were going to bury her, but she looked so lifelike, for her 
red cheeks had not paled, that they said to one another, 



LITTLE SNOW-WHITE 235 

"We cannot bury her in the black ground," and they 
ordered a transparent case to be made of glass. In 
this, one could see on all sides, and the Dwarfs wrote 
her name with golden letters upon the glass, saying that 
she was a King's daughter. 

They placed the glass case upon the ledge of a rock, 
and one of them always remained by it, watching. Even 
the beasts bewailed the loss of Snow-White; first came 
an owl, then a raven, and last of all a dove. 

For a long time Snow-White lay peacefully in her 
case, and changed not, but looked as if she were only 
asleep, for she was still white as snow, red as blood, and 
her hair as black as ebony. 

By and by it happened that a King's son was travel- 
ing in the forest, and came to the Dwarfs' house to pass 
the night. He soon perceived the glass case upon the 
rock, and the beautiful maiden lying within, and he read 
also the golden inscription. 

When he had examined it he said to the Dwarfs, 
"Let me have this case, and I will pay you what you 
like for it." 

But the Dwarfs replied, "We will not sell it for all the 
gold in the world." 

"Then give it to me," said the Prince, "for I cannot 
live without Snow-White. I will honor and protect her 
so long as I live." 

When the Dwarfs saw he was so much in earnest 
they pitied him, and at last gave him the case, and the 
Prince ordered it to be carried away on the shoulders 
of two of his attendants. Presently it happened that 
they stumbled over a rut, and with the shock the piece 
of poisoned apple which lay in Snow-White' s mouth 



236 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

fell out. Very soon she opened her eyes, and, raising 
the lid of the glass case, she rose up and asked, "Where 
am I?" 

Full of joy, the Prince answered, "You are safe with 
me." And he related to her what she had suffered, and 
how he would rather have her than any other for his 
wife, and he asked her to accompany him home to the 
castle of the King his father. Snow-White consented, 
and when they arrived there the wedding between them 
was celebrated as speedily as possible, with all splendor 
and magnificence. 

By chance the old stepmother of Snow- White was 
also invited to the wedding, and when she was dressed 
in all her finery to go, she first stepped in front of her 
mirror and asked — 

"Oh, mirror, mirror on the wall, 
Who is the fairest of us all? " 

and it replied — 

" Thou wort the fairest, oh, lady Queen; 
The Prince's bride is more fair, I ween." 

At these words the old Queen fell in a fury, and was so 
terribly mortified that she knew not what to do with 
herself. At first she resolved not to go to the wedding, 
but she could not resist the wish for a sight of the young 
Queen. As soon as she entered she recognized Snow- 
White, and was so filled with rage and astonishment 
that she remained rooted to the ground. Just then a 
pair of red-hot iron shoes were brought in by means of 
a pair of tongs, and set before her, and these she was 
forced to put on and to dance in them till she fell down 
dead. 



THE TABLE, THE ASS, AND 
THE STICK 

A long while ago there lived a Tailor who had three 
sons, but only a single Goat, which, as it had to furnish 
milk for all, needed good fodder. So every day the sons 
by turns led her into the meadow. One morning the 
eldest took the Goat into the churchyard, where grew 
the finest herbs, and let her eat and then frisk about 
imdisturbed. 

In the evening, when it was time to return, he asked, 
"Goat, are you satisfied?" The Goat replied — 

"I am satisfied, quite; 
No more can I bite." 

"Then come home," said the youth, and catching 
hold of the rope, he led her to the stall and made her fast. 

"Now," said the old Tailor, "has the Goat had 
enough food?" 

"Yes," repHed his son, "she has eaten all she can." 

The father, however, wished to see for himself; and 
so he went into the stall, stroked the Goat, and asked her 
whether she were satisfied. The Goat replied — 

"Whereof should I be satisfied? 
Among the graves I leapt about, 
And found no food, so went without." 

"What do I hear!" exclaimed the Tailor, and ran up 
to his son and said, "Oh, you bad boy! You said the 
Goat was satisfied, and then brought her away hungry," 

237 



238 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

and in a rage he took the yard measure down from the 
wall, and drove his son out of the house. 

The following morning was the second son's turn, and 
he picked out a place in the garden hedge, where grew 
very fine herbs, which the Goat ate up entirely. When 
in the evening he wanted to return, he asked the Goat 
first whether she were satisfied, and she replied as before — 

"I am satisfied, quite; 
No more can I bite." 

"Then come home," said the youth, and drove her 
to her stall, and tied her fast. 

Soon after the old Tailor asked, "Has the Goat had 
her usual food?'' 

"Yes," replied his son; "she ate up all the herbs." 
But the Tailor wished to see for himself, and so he 
went into the stall, and asked the Goat whether she had 
had enough 

"Whereof should I be satisfied? 
Within the hedge I leapt about, 
And found no food, so went without." 

replied the animal. 

"The wicked scamp!" exclaimed the Tailor, "to let 
such a capital animal starve!" and, running indoors, he 
drove his son out of the house with his yard measure. 

It was now the third son's turn, and he wanted to 
make a good beginning, so he sought some bushes full of 
beautifully tender leaves, of which he let the Goat 
plentifully partake; and at evening time, when he wished 
to go home, he asked the Goat the same question as the 
others had done, and received the same answer — • 

"I am satisfied, quite; 
No more can I bite." 



THE TABLE, THE ASS, AND THE STICK 239 

So then he led her home, and tied her up in her stall ; 
and presently the old man came and asked whether the 
Goat had had its regular food, and the youth replied, 
''Yes." But he wished to see for himself, and then the 
wicked beast told him, as it had done before — 

" Whereof should I be satisfied ? 
Around the bush I jumped about, 
And found no food, so went without." 

"Oh, the scoundrel!" exclaimed the Tailor, in a rage. 
"He is just as careless and forgetful as the others; he 
shall no longer eat of my bread!" and, rushing into the 
house, he dealt his youngest son such tremendous blows 
with the yard measure that the boy ran away. 

The old Tailor was now left alone with his Goat, and 
the following morning he went to the stall, and fondled 
the animal, saying, "Come, my dear little creature; I 
will lead you myself into the meadow." He took the 
rope, and brought her to some green lettuces, and let 
her feed to her heart's content. When evening arrived 
he asked her, as his sons had done before, whether she 
were satisfied, and she replied — 

"I am satisfied, quite; 
No more can I bite." 

So he led her home, and tied her up in her stall; but 
before he left it, he turned round and asked once more, 
* 'Are you quite satisfied ? ' ' The malicious brute answered 
in the same manner as before — 

"Whereof should I be satisfied? 
Upon the green I leapt about, 
And found no food, so went without." 

As soon as the Tailor heard this he was thunderstruck, 



240 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

and perceived directly that he had driven away his three 
sons without cause. 

"Stop a bit, you ungrateful beast!" he exclaimed. 
"It is not enough to drive you away; I will mark you so 
that you shall never dare to show yourself among honor- 
able tailors." So saying, he sprang up with great 
haste, fetched a razor, and shaved the Goat's head as 
bare as the palm of his hand; and, because the yard 
measure was too good for such service, he laid hold of a 
whip, and gave the animal such hearty cuts with it 
that she ran off as fast as possible. 

When the old man was thus left alone in his house 
he fell into great grief, and would have been only too 
happy to have had his three sons back; but no one knew 
whither they had wandered. 

The eldest, however, had gone apprentice to a joiner, 
with whom he worked industriously and cheerfully; and 
when his time was out, his master presented him with a 
table, which had a very ordinary appearance and was 
made of common wood, but had one excellent quality. 
If its owner placed it before him, and said, "Table, 
cover thyself," the good table was at once covered with 
a fine cloth, and plates, and knives and forks, and dishes 
of roast and baked meat took their places on it, and a 
great glass filled with red wine gladdened one's heart. 

Our young fellow thought, "Herewith you have 
enough for your lifetime," and went, full of glee, about 
the world, never troubling himself whether the inn were 
good or bad, or whether it offered anything or nothing. 
Whenever he pleased he went to no inn at all, but in the 
field, or wood, or any meadow, in fact, wherever he liked. 
He had only to take the table off his back, set it before 



THE TABLE, THE ASS, AND THE STICK 241 

him, and say, "Table, cover thyself," and he had all he 
could desire to eat and drink. 

At last it came into his head to return to his father, 
whose anger, he thought, would be abated by time, and 
with whom he might live very comfortably with his 
excellent table. It fell out on his journey home that 
one evening he arrived at an inn which was full of people, 
who bade him welcome, and invited him to come in and 
eat with them, for otherwise he would get nothing at all. 
But the Joiner replied, "No, I will not take the little you 
have from you; rather than that, you must be my 
guests." At this the others laughed, and thought he 
was making game of them; but he placed his wooden 
table in the middle of the room, and said, "Table, cover 
thyself," and in the twinkling of an eye it was set out 
with meats as good as any that the host could have fur- 
nished, the smell of which was very savory to the noses 
of the guests. "Welcome, good friends," said the Joiner; 
and the guests, when they saw he was in earnest, did not 
wait to be asked twice, but quickly seated themselves 
and set to valiantly with their knives. What made 
them wonder most, however, was that when any dish 
became empty another full one instantly took its place; 
and the landlord, who stood in a corner looking on, 
thought to himself, "You could make good use of such 
a cook as that in your trade," but he said nothing. 

Meanwhile the Joiner and his companions sat making 
merry till late at night. But at last they went to bed, 
among them the Joiner, who placed his wishing table 
against the wall before going to sleep. The landlord, 
however, could not get to sleep, for his thoughts troubled 
him. He suddenly remembered that there stood in his 

16 



242 GRIMxM'S FAIRY TALES 

lumber room an old table which was useless; he fetched 
it, and put it in the place of the wishing table. The next 
morning the Joiner counted out his lodging money, 
placed the table on his back, ignorant that it had been 
changed, and went his way. At noonday he reached his 
father's house, and was received with great joy. 

"Now, my dear son," said the old man, "what have 
you learned?" 

"I have become a joiner, father." 

"A capital trade, too. But what have you brought 
home with you from your travels?" 

"The best thing I have brought," said the youth, 
"is this table." 

The father looked at it on every side, and said, "You 
have made a very bad hand of that; it is an old, worth- 
less table." 

"But," interrupted his son, "it is one which covers 
itself; and when I place it before me and say, 'Table, 
cover thyself,' it is instantly filled with the most savory 
meats and wine, which will make your heart sing. Just 
invite your friends and acquaintances, and you shall 
soon see how they will be refreshed and revived with 
what the table provides." 

As soon as the company was assembled he placed 
his table in the middle of the room, and called out to it 
to cover itself. But the table did not stir and remained 
as bare as any other table which does not understand 
what is spoken; and the poor Joiner at once perceived 
that the table was changed, and he was ashamed to appear 
thus like an impostor before the guests, who laughed at 
him and were obliged to go home without eating or 
drinking. So the father took up his mending again, 



THE TABLE, THE ASS, AND THE STICK 243 

and stitched away as fast as ever, and the son was obliged 
to go to work for a master carpenter. 

Meanwhile the second son had been living with a 
miller and learning his trade. As soon as his time was 
up his master said, "Since you have served me so well, I 
present you with this ass, which has a wonderful gift, al- 
though it can neither draw a wagon nor carry a sack." 

"For what, then, is he useful?" asked the youth. 

"He drops gold from his mouth," replied the miller. 
" If you tie a pocket under his chin and cry, ' Bricklebrit,' 
the good beast will pour out gold coin like hail." 

"That is a very fine thing," thought the youth; and 
thanking the master, he went off upon his journey. 
Now, whenever, he needed money, he had only to say 
to his ass, "Bricklebrit," and it rained down gold pieces, 
so that he had no other trouble than to pick them up 
from the ground. Wherever he went only the best was 
good enough for him, and the dearer it was the better, 
for he always had a full purse. When he had looked 
about the world for some time, he thought he would go 
to visit his father, whose anger he supposed had abated ; 
and moreover, since he brought with him an ass of gold, 
he would no doubt receive him gladly. 

It so happened that he came to the very same inn 
where his brother's table had been changed, and as he 
came up, leading his ass by the bridle, the landlord would 
have taken the animal and tied him up, but the young 
apprentice said to him, "You need not trouble yourself; 
I will lead my gray beast myself into the stable and tie 
him, for I must know where he stands." The landlord 
wondered at this, and he thought that one who looked 
after his own beast would not spend much ; but presently 
16a 



244 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

our friend, dipping into his pocket and taking out two 
pieces of gold, gave them to him, and bade him fetch 
the best he could. This made the landlord open his 
eyes, and he ran and fetched, in a great hurry, the best 
he could get. 

When he had finished his meal, the youth asked how 
much he was indebted, and the landlord, having no 
mind to spare him, said that a couple of gold pieces more 
were due. 

The youth felt in his pocket, but his money was just 
at an end; so he exclaimed, "Wait a bit. landlord; I will 
fetch some gold," and, taking the tablecloth with him, he 
went out. The landlord knew not what to think, but 
being covetous, he slunk out after the youth, and, as he 
bolted the stable door, the landlord peeped through a 
hole in the wall. The youth spread the cloth beneath 
the ass, and called out, "Bricklebrit," and in a moment 
the beast began to let fall gold, so that money rained. 

"By the powers," exclaimed the landlord, "ducats 
are soon coined so; that is not a bad sort of purse!" 
The youth now paid his bill and lay down to sleep, but 
in the middle of the night the landlord slipped into the 
stable, and led away the mint-master, and tied up a 
different ass in its place. 

Early in the morning the youth drove away with the 
ass, thinking it was his own, and at noonday he reached 
his father, who was very glad to see him return, and 
received him kindly. 

"What have you become?" asked the father. 

"A miller," was the reply. 

"And what have you brought home with you from 
your wanderings?" 



THE TABLE, THE ASS, AND THE STICK 245 

"Nothing but an ass." 

"Oh, there are plenty of that sort here now; it had 
far better been a good goat," said the old man. 

"Yes," replied the son, "but this is no common 
animal, but one which, when I say 'Bricklebrit,' drops 
gold from its mouth. Just call your friends here, and I 
will make them all rich in a twinkling." 

"Well," exclaimed the Tailor, "that would please 
me greatly, for then I need not use my needle any more"; 
and running out, he called together all his acquaintances. 

As soon as they were assembled, the young Miller 
bade them make a circle, and, spreading out a cloth, he 
brought the ass into the middle of the room. "Now 
pay attention," said he to them, and called out, "Brickle- 
brit"; but not a single gold piece fell, and it was clear 
that the ass did not understand coining, for it is not every 
ass that can be taught to make money. The poor young 
man pulled a long face when he saw that he had been 
betrayed, and he was obliged to beg pardon of the 
guests, who returned as poor as they came. So the old 
man had to take to his needle again, and the youth to 
bind himself with another miller. 

Meanwhile the third brother had apprenticed to a 
turner to learn his trade; but he got on very slowly, 
as it was a very difficult art to acquire. And while he 
was away, his brothers sent him word how badly things 
had gone with them, and how the landlord had robbed 
them of their wishing gifts on their return home. When 
he had served his time and learned everything and was 
about to leave, his master presented him with a sack, 
saying, "In it there Hes a stick." 

"I will take the sack readily, for it may do me good 



246 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

service," replied the youth. "But what is the stick for? 
It only makes the sack the heavier to carry." 

"That I will tell you. If any one does you an injury, 
you have only to say, * Stick, out of the sack,' and instantly 
the stick will spring out and dance about on the people's 
backs in such style that they will not be able to stir a 
finger for a week afterwards; and, moreover, it will not 
leave off till you say, 'Stick, get back into the sack.' " 

The youth thanked him, and hung the sack over his 
shoulder; and when any one came too near, and wished 
to meddle with him, he said, "Stick, come out of the 
sack," and immediately it sprang out, and began laying 
about it; and when he called it back, it disappeared so 
quickly that no one could tell where it came from. 

One evening he arrived at the inn where his brothers 
had been basely robbed, and, laying his knapsack on the 
table, he began to talk of all the wonderful things he 
had seen in the world. "Yes," said he, "one may find, 
indeed, a table which supplies itself, and a golden ass, and 
things of that kind — all very good in their places, and 
I do not despise them; but they shrink into nothing 
beside the treasure which I carry with me in this sack." 

The landlord pricked up his ears. "What on earth 
can it be?" he thought to himself. "The sack is certainly 
full of precious stones, and I must manage to get hold 
of them; for all good things come in threes." 

As soon as it was bedtime our youth stretched him- 
self upon a bench, and laid his sack down for a pillow; 
and, when he appeared to be in a deep sleep, the landlord 
crept softly to him, and began to pull very gently and 
cautiously at the sack, to see if he could manage to draw 
it away, and put another in its place. The young Turner, 



THE TABLE, THE ASS, AND THE STICK 247 

however, had been waiting for him to do this, and, just 
as the man gave a good pull, he exclaimed, "Stick, out 
of the sack! " Immediately out it jumped, and thumped 
about on the landlord's back and ribs with a good will. 

The landlord began to cry for mercy, but the louder 
he cried the more forcibly did the stick beat time on his 
back, until at last he fell exhausted to the ground. 

Then the Turner said, "If you do not give up the 
table which covers itself, and the golden ass, that dance 
shall commence again." 

"No, no!" cried the landlord, in a weak voice; "I 
will give them up with pleasure, but just let your horri- 
ble hobgoblin get back into his sack." 

"I will grant pardon, if you do right; but, take care 
what you are about," replied the Turner; so he bade the 
stick return and he let him rest. 

On the following morning the Turner, with the table 
and the ass, went home to his father, who, as soon as he 
saw him, felt very glad, and asked what he had learned 
in foreign parts. 

"Dear father," replied he, "I have become a turner." 

"A difficult business that; but what have you brought 
back with you from your travels?" 

"A precious stick," replied the son; "a stick in this 
sack." 

"What!" exclaimed the old man, "a stick! Well, 
that is not worth the trouble! Why, you can cut one 
from every tree!" 

"But not such a stick as this; for if I say, * Stick, out 
of the sack,* it instantly jimips out, and executes such a 
dance upon the back of any one who would injure me, 
that at last he is beaten to the ground, crying for mercy. 



248 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

Look you, with this stick I have got back again the 
wonderful table and the golden ass of which the thievish 
landlord robbed my brothers. Now let them both be 
summoned, invite all your acquaintances, and I will not 
only give them plenty to eat and drink, but pocketsful 
of money." 

The old Tailor would scarcely beUeve him; but, 
nevertheless, he called in his friends. Then the young 
Turner placed a tablecloth in the middle of the room, 
and led in the ass, saying to his brother, "Now, speak 
to him." 

The Miller called out " Bricklebrit ! " and in a moment 
the gold pieces dropped down on the floor in a pelting 
shower; and so it continued until they all had so much 
that they could carry no more. (I fancy my readers 
would have been very happy to have been there too!) 

After this the table was fetched in, and the Joiner 
said, "Table, cover thyself"; and it was at once filled 
with the choicest dishes. Then they began such a meal 
as the Tailor had never known in his house; and the 
whole company remained till late at night, making merry. 

The next day the Tailor forsook needle and thread, 
and put them away, with his measures and goose, in a 
cupboard; and forever after lived happily and con- 
tentedly with his three sons. 

But now I must tell you what became of the Goat, 
whose fault it was that the three brothers were driven 
away. She was so ashamed of her bald head that she 
ran into a Fox's hole and hid herself. When the Fox 
came home he saw a pair of great eyes looking at him 
in the darkness, which so frightened him that he ran 



THE TABLE, THE ASS, AND THE STICK 249 

back, and presently met a Bear, who, perceiving how 
terrified Reynard appeared, said to him, "What is the 
matter, Brother Fox, that you make such a face?" 

"Ah!" he repHed, "in my hole sits a horrible beast, 
who glared at me with most fiery eyes." 

"Oh! we will soon drive it out," said the Bear; and 
going up to the hole, he peeped in himself; but as soon 
as he saw the fiery eyes he also turned tail, and would 
have nothing to do with the terrible beast, and so took 
to flight. On his way a Bee met him, and soon saw he 
could not feel much through his thick coat; and so she 
said, "You are making a very rueful face, Mr. Bear; 
pray, where have you left your merry one?" 

"Why," answered Bruin, "a great horrible beast has 
laid himself down in Reynard's house, and glares there 
with such fearful eyes, we cannot drive him out." 

"Well, Mr. Bear," said the Bee, "I am sorry for you; 
I am a poor creature whom you never notice, but yet I 
believe I can help you." 

So saying, she flew into the Fox's hole, settled on the 
clean-shaven head of the Goat, and stung it so severely 
that the poor animal sprang up and ran off madly; and 
nobody knows to this hour where she went. 



THE NOSE 

Did you ever hear the story of the three poor Soldiers, 
who, after having fought hard in the wars, set out on 
their road home, begging their way as they went? 

They had journeyed on a long way, sick at heart 
with their bad luck at thus being turned loose on the 
world in their old days, when one evening they reached 
a deep gloomy wood through which they must pass. 
Night came fast upon them, and they found that they 
must, however unwillingly, sleep in the wood; so to 
make all as safe as they could, it was agreed that two 
should lie down and sleep, while a third sat up and 
watched lest wild beasts should break in and tear them 
to pieces. When he was tired he was to wake one of 
the others and sleep in his turn, and so on with the third, 
that they might thus share the work fairly among them. 

The two who were to rest first soon lay down and 
fell fast asleep, and the other made himself a good fire 
under the trees and sat down by the side to keep watch. 
He had not sat long before all on a sudden up came a 
little man in a red jacket. 

"Who's there?" said he. 

"A friend," said the Soldier. 

"What sort of a friend?" 

"An old broken soldier," said the other, "with his 
two comrades who have nothing left to live on. Come, 
sit down and warm yourself." 

"Well, my worthy fellow," said the little man, "I 
will do what I can for you. Take this, and show it to 

250 



THE NOSE 251 

your comrades in the morning." So he took out an old 
cloak and gave it to the Soldier, telling him that whenever 
he put it over his shoulders anjrthing he wished for 
would be granted him. Then the little man made him 
a bow, and walked away. 

Soon it was the second Soldier's turn to watch, and 
the first laid himself down to sleep. But the second 
man had not long sat by himself before up came the 
little man in the red jacket again. The Soldier treated 
him in a friendly way, as his comrade had done, and the 
little man gave him a purse, which he said would always 
be full of gold, let him draw as much as he would. 

Then it was the third Soldier's turn to watch, and he 
also had the little man for his guest. To him was given 
a wonderful horn that drew crowds around it whenever 
it was played, and made every one forget his business to 
come and dance to its beautiful music. 

In the morning each told his story and showed his 
treasure; and as they all liked one another very much, 
and were old friends, they agreed to travel together to 
see the world, and for a while to make use of only the 
wonderful purse. Thus they spent their time very 
joyously, till at last they began to be tired of this roving 
life, and thought they would like to have a home of their 
own. So the first Soldier put his old cloak on, and 
wished for a fine castle. In a moment it stood before 
their eyes; fine gardens and green lawns were spread 
round it, and flocks of sheep and goats and herds of 
cattle were grazing about, and out of the gate came a 
fine coach with three dapple-gray horses to meet them 
and bring them home. 

All this was very well for a time; but it would not 



252 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

do to stay at home always. So they got together all 
their rich clothes and horses and servants, and ordered 
their coach with three horses, and set out on a journey 
to see a neighboring King. Now this King had an only 
daughter, and as he took the three Soldiers for Kings* 
sons he gave them a kind welcome. One day, as the 
second Soldier was walking with the Princess, she saw 
the wonderful purse in his hand. She asked him what 
it was, and he was foolish enough to tell her — though 
indeed it did not much signify, for she was a Witch and 
knew all the wonderful things that the three Soldiers 
brought. Now this Princess was very cunning and artful, 
and she set to work and made a purse so like the Soldier's 
that no one would know one from the other. Then she 
asked the Soldier to come and see her, and made him 
drink some wine that she had got ready for him, till he 
fell fast asleep. When he was asleep she felt in his 
pocket, and took away the wonderful purse and left 
in its place the one she had made. 

The next morning the Soldiers set out for home. 
Happening to want some money, soon after they reached 
their castle, they went to their purse for it, and found 
something in it indeed, but to their great sorrow, when 
they had emptied it none came in the place of what 
they took. Then the cheat was soon found out; for 
the second Soldier knew where he had been, and how 
he had told the story to the Princess, and he guessed 
that she had betrayed him. 

"Alas!" cried he, "poor wretches that we are, what 
shall we do?" 

"Oh!" said the first Soldier, "let no gray hairs grow 
for this mishap; I will soon get the purse back." 



THE NOSE 253 

So he threw his cloak across his shoulders and wished 
himself in the Princess's chamber. There he found her 
sitting alone, telling her gold, that fell around her in a 
shower from the purse. But the Soldier stood looking 
at her too long, for the moment she saw him she started 
up and cried out with all her force, "Thieves! Thieves!" 
so that the whole court came running in and tried to 
seize him. The poor Soldier now began to be dread- 
fully frightened in his turn, and thought it was high time 
to be off. Without thinking of the ready way of traveling 
his cloak gave him, he ran to the window, opened it, 
and jimiped out. But unluckily in his haste his cloak 
caught and was left hanging, to the great joy of the 
Princess, who knew its worth. 

The poor Soldier made the best of his way home to 
his comrades, on foot and in a very downcast mood; 
but the third Soldier told him to keep up his heart, 
and taking his horn, blew a merry tune. At the first 
blast a countless troop of foot and horse came rushing 
to their aid, and they set out to make war against their 
enemy. Then the King's palace was besieged, and the 
King was told that he must give up the purse and cloak, 
or not one stone would be left upon another. The 
King went into his daughter's chamber and talked with 
her; but she said, "Let me try first if I cannot beat 
them some other way." So she thought of a cunning 
scheme, and dressed herself as a poor girl, with a basket 
on her arm, and setting out by night with her maid, 
went into the enemy's camp as if she wanted to sell 
trinkets. 

In the morning she began to ramble about, singing 
ballads so beautifully that all the tents were left empty, 



254 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

and the soldiers ran round in crowds, and thought of 
nothing but hearing her sing. Among them came the 
Soldier to whom the horn belonged, and as soon as she 
saw him she winked to her maid, who slipped slyly 
through the crowd and went into his tent, where the 
horn hung, and stole it away. This done, they both 
returned safely to the palace. The besieging army 
went away, the wonderful gifts were all left in the hands 
of the Princess, and the three Soldiers were as penniless 
and forlorn as when the little man with the red jacket 
found them in the wood. 

Poor fellows! They began to think what was now 
to be done. " Comrades," at last said the second Soldier, 
who had had the purse, "we had better part; we cannot 
live together. Let each seek his bread as well as he can." 
So he turned to the right, and the other two to the left; 
for they said they would rather travel together. Then 
on he strayed till he came to a wood (now this was the 
same wood where they had met with so much good luck 
before) ; and he walked on a long time till evening began 
to fall, when he sat down tired beneath a tree, and soon 
fell asleep. 

Morning dawned, and at opening his eyes he was 
greatly delighted to see that the tree was laden with 
the most beautiful apples. He was hungry enough, so 
he soon plucked and ate first one, then a second, then 
a third apple. A strange feeling came over his nose. 
When he put the apple to his mouth something was in 
the way. He felt it; it was his nose, that grew and 
grew till it hung down to his breast. It did not stop 
there; still it grew and grew. "Heavens!" thought he, 
"when will it have done growing?" And well might he 



THE NOSE 255 

ask, for by this time it reached the ground as he sat 
on the grass. Thus it kept creeping on till he could not 
bear its weight, or raise himself up. It seemed as if 
it would never end, for soon it stretched its enormous 
length all through the wood. 

Meantime his comrades journeyed on, till on a 
sudden one of them stumbled against something. ' ' What 
can that be?" said the other. They looked, and could 
think of nothing that it was like but a nose. "We will 
follow it and find its owner," said they; so they traced 
it up till at last they found their poor comrade stretched 
imder the apple tree. What was to be done? They 
tried to carry him, but in vain. They caught a donkey 
that was passing by, and raised him upon its back; 
but it was soon tired from carrying such a load. So 
they sat down in despair, when up came the little man 
in the red jacket. 

"Why, how now, friend?" said he, laughing. "Well, 
I must find a cure for you, I see." So he told them to 
gather a pear from a tree that grew close by, and the 
nose would grow right again. No time was lost, and the 
nose was soon brought to its proper size, to the poor 
Soldier's joy. 

"I will do something more for you," said the little 
man. "Take some of those pears and apples with you. 
Whoever eats one of the apples will have his nose grow 
like yours just now; but if you give him a pear, all will 
come right again. Go to the Princess and induce her 
to eat some of your apples. Her nose will grow twenty 
times as long as yours did. Then look sharp, and you 
will get what you want of her." 

Then they thanked their old friend very heartily 



256 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

for all his kindness, and it was agreed that the poor 
Soldier who had already tried the power of the apple 
should undertake the task. So he dressed himself up 
as a gardener's boy, and went to the King's palace, 
and said he had apples to sell, such as were never seen 
there before. Every one that saw them was delighted 
and wanted to taste, but he said they were for the 
Princess only; and she soon sent her maid to buy his 
stock. The apples were so ripe and rosy she soon ate 
one, and had eaten three when she too began to wonder 
what ailed her nose, for it grew and grew, down to the 
ground, out at the window, and over the garden, nobody 
knows where. 

Then the King made known to all his kingdom that 
whoever would heal her of this dreadful disease should 
be richly rewarded. Many tried, but the Princess found 
no relief. And now the old Soldier dressed himself 
very sprucely as a doctor, and said he could cure her. 
So he chopped up some of the apple, and to punish her 
a little more, gave her a dose, saying he would call next 
day to see her again. The morrow came, and of course, 
instead of being better the nose had been growing fast 
all night, and the poor Princess was in a dreadful fright. 
Now the doctor chopped up a very little of the pear and 
gave it to her, and said he was sure it would help her, 
and that he would call again the next day. Next day 
came, and to be sure the nose was a little smaller, but 
still it was bigger than when the doctor first began to 
meddle with it. 

Then he thought to himself, "I must frighten this 
cunning Princess a little more before I shall get what I 
want of her"; so he gave her another dose of the apple, 



THE NOSE 257 

and said he wovild call on the morrow. The morrow 
came, and the nose was ten times as bad as before. 

"My good lady," said the doctor, "something works 
against my medicine, and is too strong for it; but I 
know by the force of my art what it is. You have stolen 
goods about you, I am sure; and if you do not give 
them back I can do nothing for you." 

But the Princess denied very stoutly that she had 
anything of the kind. 

"Very well," said the doctor, "you may do as you 
please, but I am sure I am right, and you will die if you 
do not own it." 

Then he went to the King and told him how the matter 
stood. 

"Daughter," said he, "send back to the right owners 
the cloak, the purse, and the horn that you stole." 

Then the Princess ordered her maid to fetch all three, 
and gave them to the doctor, and begged him to give 
them back to the Soldiers. The moment he had them 
safe he gave her a whole pear to eat, and the nose re- 
tvirned to its proper size. As for the doctor, he put on 
the cloak, wished the King and all his court a good day, 
and was soon with his two comrades, who from that 
time lived happily at heme in their palace, except when 
they took airings in their coach with the three dapple- 
gray horses. 



RAPUNZEL 

Once upon a time there lived a man and his wife, 
who much desired to have a child; but for a long time 
they wished in vain. Out of a little window in the back 
part of their house one could see into a beautiful garden, 
which was full of fine flowers and vegetables; but it was 
surrounded by a high wall, and no one dared to go in 
because it belonged to a Witch possessed of great power 
and feared by the whole world. 

One day as the woman stood at this window looking 
into the garden she saw a bed which was filled with the 
most beautiful radishes, which seemed so fresh and green 
that a great desire seized her to eat some of them. This 
wish increased daily, and as she knew that she could 
not partake of them she fell ill, and looked very pale 
and miserable. This frightened her husband, who asked, 
"What ails you, my dear wife?" 

"Ah!" she replied, "if I cannot get some of those 
radishes from the garden behind the house, I shall die!" 
The husband, who loved her very much, thought, 
"Rather than let my wife die, I must fetch her some 
radishes, cost what they may." So in the gloom of the 
evening he climbed the wall of the Witch's garden, 
snatched a handful of radishes in great haste, and brought 
them to his wife. She immediately made them into a 
salad, which she ate with relish. However, they were 
so nice, and so well-flavored, that the next day she felt 
the same desire, three times stronger than before. Since 
she could not get any rest, her husband was obliged to 



RAPUNZEL 259 

promise her some more. So in the evening he began 
clambering over the wall; but, oh! how terribly fright- 
ened he was, for there he saw the old Witch standing 
before him! 

"How dare you," — she began, looking at him with 
a frightful scowl, — "how dare you climb over into my 
garden to take away my radishes like a thief? Evil 
shall come to you for this." 

"Ah!" replied he, "let mercy temper justice; I have 
done this out of great necessity: my wife saw your 
radishes from her window, and took such a fancy to them 
that she would have died if she had not eaten of them." 
Then the Witch's anger softened, and she said, "If that 
is the case, I will let you take away all the radishes you 
please; but I make one condition. You must give me 
the child which will be bom to you. All shall go well 
with it, and I will care for it like a mother." In his 
anxiety the man consented, and when a girl was born to 
them the Witch appeared, named the child "Rapunzel," 
and took it away with her. 

Rapunzel grew to be the most beautiful child under 
the sun. When she was twelve years old the Witch 
shut her up in a tower, which stood in a forest, and had 
neither stairs nor door, and only one little window at 
the top. When the Witch wished to enter she stood 
beneath, and called out — 

"Rapunzel! Rapunzel! 
Let down your hair!" 

for Rapunzel had long and beautiful hair, fine as spun 
gold; and as soon as she heard the Witch's voice she 
unbound her braided tresses, opened the window, and 



26o GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

let her hair down fully twenty ells, and then the Witch 
mounted by it. 

After a couple of years had passed it happened that 
the King's son was riding through the wood, and came 
by the tower. There he heard a song so beautiful that 
he stood still and listened. It was Rapunzel, who, to 
while away her lonehness, was exercising her sweet voice. 
The King's son wished to ascend to her, and looked for 
a door to the tower, but he could find none. So he rode 
home; but the song had touched his heart so deeply 
that he went every day to the forest to hear it. One day 
as he stood listening behind a tree, he saw the Witch 
come up and heard her call out — 

' ' Rapunzel ! Rapunzel ! 
Let down your hair!" 

Then Rapunzel let down her braids, and the Witch 
mounted. 

"So that is the ladder by which one must climb! 
Then I will try my luck, too," said the Prince; and at 
nightfall the next day he went to the tower and cried — 

' ' Rapunzel ! Rapunzel ! 
Let down your hair ! ' ' 

Then the tresses fell down, and he climbed up. 

Rapunzel was much frightened at first when he came 
in, for she had never seen a man before; but the King's 
son talked in a friendly manner to her, and told her his 
heart had been so moved by her singing that he could 
have no peace until he had seen her. So Rapunzel lost 
her terror, and when he asked her if she would have 
him for a husband, and she saw that he was young and 
handsome, she thought, "He will love me more than 



RAPUNZEL 261 

the old woman does." So she consented and laid her 
hand in his. 

"I would willingly go with you, but I do not know 
how to descend," she said; "but if you bring with you a 
skein of silk each time you come, I will weave a ladder, 
and when it is ready I will come down by it, and you 
shall take me on your horse." Then they agreed that 
they should never meet till the evening, as the Witch 
came in the daytime. 

The old woman noticed nothing until one time 
Rapunzel forgetfully asked, "Tell me, mother, how it 
happens you find it more difficult to come up than the 
young King's son. He is with me in a moment." 

"Oh, you wicked child ! " exclaimed the Witch. "What 
do I hear? I thought I had separated you from all the 
world, and yet you have deceived me." In a fury she 
seized Rapunzel's beautiftil hair, wrapped it about her 
left hand, snatched a pair of scissors in her right, and 
snip, snap! cut it all off; and the beautiful tresses lay 
upon the ground. Then she was so hard-hearted that 
she took the poor maiden into a great desert, and left 
her to live in great misery and grief. 

But at evening of the day on which she cast out 
Rapunzel, the old Witch made the braids fast to the 
window latch, and when the King's son came, and 
called out — 

' ' Rapunzel ! Rapunzel ! 
Let down your hair!" 

she let them down. The Prince mounted ; but when he 
got to the top he found, not his dear Rapunzel, but the 
Witch, who looked at him with fimous and wicked eyes. 
17 



262 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

"Aha!" she exclaimed scornfully, "you would fetch 
your dear wife; but the beautiful bird sits no longer in 
her nest, singing; the cat has taken her away, and will 
now scratch out your eyes as well. Rapunzel is lost to 
you; you will never see her again." 

The Prince lost his senses with grief at these words, 
and in his despair sprang out of the window of the tower. 
He escaped with his life, but the thorns into which he fell 
put out his eyes. So he wandered, blind, in the forest, 
eating nothing but roots and berries, and doing nothing 
but weep and lament over the loss of his dear wife. He 
wandered about thus, in great misery, for some few years, 
but at last arrived at the desert where Rapunzel lived in 
great sorrow. He heard a voice which he thought he 
knew, and went toward her. As he approached, Ra- 
punzel recognized him, and fell on his neck and wept. 
Two of her tears moistened his eyes, and they became 
clear again, so that he could see as well as formerly. 

Then he led her away to his kingdom, where he was 
received with great demonstrations of joy, and where 
they lived for a long time, contented and happy. 

What became of the old Witch, no one ever knew. 



A TALE OF ONE WHO TRAVELED TO 
LEARN WHAT SHIVERING MEANT 

A father had two sons, the elder of whom was for- 
ward and clever enough to do almost an3rthing; but the 
younger was so stupid that he could learn nothing, and 
when the people saw him they asked, "Will thy father 
always keep thee as a burden?" If anything was to be 
done, the elder always had to do it; but if his father 
called him to fetch something in the dead of night, and 
the way led through the churchyard or by a dismal 
place, he would answer, "No, father, I cannot go there, 
I am afraid"; for he was a coward. 

When, of an evening, tales were told by the fireside 
which made one shudder, and the listeners exclaimed, 
"Oh, it makes us shiver!" in a comer the younger son 
would sit listening; but he could not imagine what they 
meant, and he thought, "They say continually, *0h, it 
makes us shiver, it makes us shiver ! ' Perhaps shivering 
is an art which I cannot comprehend." One day, how- 
ever, his father said to him, "Do you hear, you there in 
the comer? You are growing stout and tall; you must 
learn some trade by which to get your living. See how 
your brother works; but you, you are not worth malt 
and hops." 

"Ah, father!" answered he, "I would willingly learn 
something. What shall I begin? I want to know what 
shivering means, for of that I can understand nothing." 

The elder brother laughed when he heard this speech, 
and thought to himself, "Ah! my brother is such a 

263 



264 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

simpleton that he cannot earn his own Uving. He who 
would be a woodcutter must get up betimes." But 
the father sighed and said, "You may learn soon enough 
what shivering means, but you will never get your bread 
by that." 

Soon after, the parish sexton came in for a gossip, so 
the father told him his troubles, and how his younger 
son was such a simpleton that he knew nothing, and could 
learn nothing. "Just fancy, when I asked him how he 
intended to earn his bread, he desired to learn what 
shivering meant." 

"Oh, if that be all," answered the sexton, "he can 
learn that soon enough with me; just send him to my 
place, and I will soon teach him." 

The father was very glad, because he thought that 
it would do the boy good; so the sexton took him home 
to ring the bells. About two days afterwards he called 
him up at midnight to go into the church tower to toll 
the bell. 

"You shall soon learn what shivering means," thought 
the sexton, and got up and went out. As soon as the 
boy reached the belfry, and turned himself round to 
seize the rope, he saw upon the stairs, near the sounding 
hole, a white figure. 

"Who's there?" he called out; but the figure gave 
no answer, and neither stirred nor spoke. 

"Answer," said the boy, "or make haste off; you have 
no business here at night." But the sexton did not stir, 
so that the boy might think he was a ghost. 

The boy called out a second time, "What are you 
doing here? Speak, if you are an honest fellow, or else 
I will throw you downstairs." 



A TALE OF ONE WHO TRAVELED 265 

The sexton said to himself, "He will not fulfill his 
word," and remained quiet as if he were of stone. Then 
the boy called out for the third time, but it produced no 
effect; so he gave a spring and threw the ghost down 
the stairs, so that it rolled ten steps and then lay motion- 
less in a corner. Thereupon he rang the bell, went home, 
lay down without saying a word, and fell fast asleep. 
The sexton's wife waited some time for her husband, but 
he did not return ; so at last she became anxious, wakened 
the boy, and asked him about her husband, who had 
gone before him to the tower. 

"I don't know where he is," answered the boy; "but 
there was some one standing on the steps who would 
not give any answer, nor go away, so I took him for a 
thief and threw him downstairs. Go now, and see where 
he is; perhaps it was he. I should be sorry if it were." 
The wife ran off, and found her husband lying in a corner, 
groaning, with one of his ribs broken. 

She took him up and ran with loud outcries to the 
boy's father, and told him, "Your son has brought a 
great misfortune on us ; he has thrown my husband down 
and broken his bones. Take the good-for-nothing fellow 
from our house." 

The terrified father came in haste and scolded the boy. 
"What do these wicked tricks mean? They will only 
bring misfortune upon you." 

"F'ather," answered the lad, "hear me! I am quite 
innocent. He stood there at midnight, like one who had 
done some evil; I did not know who it was, and cried 
three times, 'Speak, or be off!' " 

"Ah!" said the father, "everything goes badly with 
you. Out of my sight! I do not wish to see you again." 



266 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

"Yes, father, willingly; wait until it is day, then I 
will go out and learn what shivering means. I will then 
understand one business which will support me." 

"Learn what you will," replied the father; "it is all 
the same to me. Here are fifty dollars; go forth with 
them into the world, and tell no man whence you came, 
or who your father is, for I am ashamed of you " 

"Yes, father, as you wish; if you desire nothing else, 
I can easily keep it in mind." 

As soon as day broke, the youth put his fifty dollars 
into a knapsack, and went out upon the highroad, saying 
continually, "Oh, if I could but shiver!" 

Presently a man came up, who heard the boy talking 
to himself ; and as they were just passing the place where 
the gallows stood, the man said, "Do you see? There 
is the tree where seven fellows have married the hempen 
maid, and now swing to and fro. Sit yourself down 
there and wait till midnight, and then you will know what 
it is to shiver." 

"Oh! if that be all," answered the boy, "I can very 
easily do that. But if I learn so speedily what shivering 
is, then you shall have my fifty dollars if you return in 
the morning." 

Then the boy went to the gallows, sat down, and 
waited for evening; and, as he felt cold, he made a fire. 
But about midnight the wind blew so sharp that, in spite 
of the fire, he could not keep himself warm. The wind 
blew the bodies against one another, so that they swung 
backwards and forwards, and he thought, "If I am cold 
here below by the fire, how must they freeze and suffer 
above!" So his compassion was excited, and contriving 
a ladder, he mounted, and unloosening them one after 



A TALE OF ONE WHO TRAVELED 2(i^ 

another, he brought down all seven. Then he poked and 
blew the fire, and sat them round that they might warm 
themselves; but, as they sat still without moving, their 
clothing caught fire. So he said, "Take care of your- 
selves, or I will hang all of you up again." The dead 
heard not, and silently allowed their rags to burn. This 
made him so angry that he said, "If you will not hear, 
I cannot help you; but I will not burn with you!" So 
he hung them up again in a row, and sitting down by the 
fire he soon went to sleep. 

The next morning the man came, expecting to receive 
his fifty dollars, and asked, "Now do you know what 
shivering means?" 

"No," he answered; "how should I know! Those 
fellows up there have not opened their mouths, and were 
so stupid that they let the old rags on their bodies be 
burned." 

Then the man saw that he would not carry away 
the fifty dollars that day, so he went away, saying, "I 
never met with such an one before." 

The boy also went on his way, and once more began 
to say, "Ah, if I could but shiver ! If I could but shiver ! " 
A Wagoner walking behind overheard him, and asked, 
"Who are you?" 

"I do not know," answered the boy. 

The Wagoner asked again, "What do you here?" 

"I know not." 

"Who is your father?" 

"I dare not say." 

"What is it you are continually grumbling about?" 

"Oh," replied the youth, "I wish to learn what 
shivering is, but nobody can teach me." 



268 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

"Cease your silly talk," said the Wagoner. "Come 
with me, and I will see what I can do for you." So the 
boy went with the Wagoner, and about evening time 
they arrived at an inn where they put up for the night, 
and while they were going into the parlor he said, aloud, 
"Oh, if I could but shiver! If I could but shiver!" 

The host overheard him, and said, laughingly, "Oh, 
if that is all you wish, you shall soon have the oppor- 
tunity." 

' ' Hold your tongue ! * ' said his wife. ' ' So many inquis- 
itive people have already lost their lives, it were a shame 
and sin to such beautiful eyes that they should not see 
the light again." 

But the youth said, "If it be ever so difficult 1 will 
learn; for this purpose I left home"; and he would let 
the host have no peace until he told him that not far off 
stood a haunted castle, where any one might soon learn 
to shiver if he would watch there three nights. The 
King had promised his daughter in marriage to whom- 
ever would venture, and she was the most beautiful 
maiden that the sun ever shone upon. And he further 
told him that inside the castle there was an immense 
amount of treasure, guarded by evil spirits; enough to 
make any one free, and turn a poor man into a very rich 
one. Many had, he added, already ventured into this 
castle, but no one had ever come out again. 

The next morning this youth went to the King, and 
said, "If you will allow me, I wish to watch three nights 
in the haunted castle." 

The King looked at him, and because his appearance 
pleased him, he said, "You may make three requests, 
but they must be for things without life, and such as you 



A TALE OF ONE WHO TRAVELED 269 

can take with you into the castle." So the youth asked 
for a fire, a lathe, and a cutting-board. 

The King let him take these things by day into the 
castle, and when it was evening the youth went in and 
made himself a bright fire in one of the rooms, placed 
his cutting-board and knife near it, and sat down to his 
lathe. "Ah, if I could but shiver!" said he. "But even 
here I shall never learn." 

At midnight he got up to stir the fire, and, as he 
poked it, there shrieked suddenly in one corner, "Miau, 
miau, how cold I am!" 

"You simpleton!" he exclaimed, "what are you 
shrieking for? If you are so cold, come and sit down by 
the fire and warm yourself!" As he was speaking two 
great black cats sprang up to him with one tremendous 
leap, and sat down, one on each side, looking at him 
ferociously with their fiery eyes. 

When they had warmed themselves for a little while 
they said, "Comrade, shall we have a game of cards?" 

"Certainly," he replied; "but let me see your paws 
first." 

So they stretched out their claws, and he said, "Ah, 
what long nails you have. Wait a bit, I must cut them 
off first." 

So saying, he caught them up by their necks and put 
them on his board and screwed their feet down. "Since 
I have seen what you are about I have lost my relish for 
a game at cards," said he, and instantly killing them, he 
threw them out into the water. 

But no sooner had he quieted these two, and thought 
of sitting down again by his fire, than there came out of 
every hole and corner black cats and black dogs, with 



270 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

glowing chains, and more and more of them, so that he 
could not hide himself. They howled fearfully, and 
jumped upon his fire and scattered it about as if they 
would extinguish it. 

He looked on quietly for some time, but at last he 
grew angry, took up his knife and called out, "Away 
with you, you vagabonds!" and chased them about. 
A part ran off, and the rest he killed and threw into the 
pond. As soon as he returned he blew up the sparks 
of his fire again, and warmed himself, and while he 
sat, his eyes began to feel very heavy and he wished to 
sleep. He looked round and saw a great bed in one 
comer. He lay down in it; but no sooner had he closed 
his eyes than the bed began to move of itself, and 
traveled all around the castle. "Just so," said he, "only 
go faster"; whereupon the bed galloped away as if six 
horses pulled it, up and down steps and stairs, until at 
last all at once it overturned, bottom upwards, and lay 
upon him like a mountain. But up he got, threw pil- 
lows and mattresses into the air, saying, "Now, he who 
wishes may travel," and laid himself down by the fire 
and slept till day broke. 

In the morning the King came, and seeing the youth 
lying on the ground, he thought that the specters had 
killed him, so he said, "It is a great misfortune that the 
finest men are thus killed." But the youth, hearing 
this, sprang up, saying, "It is not come to that with me 
yet!" 

The King was much astonished, but still very glad, 
and asked him how he had fared. 

"Very well," replied he; "as one night has passed, 
so also may the other two." 



A TALE OF ONE WHO TRAVELED 271 

Soon after he met his landlord, who opened his eyes 
when he saw him. "I never thought to see you alive 
again," said he. "Have you learned now what shivering 
means?" 

"No," said he; "it is all of no use. Oh, if any one 
would but tell me!" 

The second night he went up again into the castle, 
sat down by the fire, and began his old song, "If I could 
but shiver!" When darkness came a ringing and rat- 
tling noise was heard, low at first, but louder and louder 
by degrees; then there was a pause, and at length, with 
a loud outcry, half a man's body came down the chim- 
ney and fell at his feet. 

"Holloa!" he exclaimed, "only half a man answered 
that ringing; that is too little." Then the ringing 
began afresh, and a roaring and howling was heard, and 
the other half fell down. 

"Wait a bit," said he; "I will poke up the fire first." 
When he had done so and looked round again, the two 
pieces had joined themselves together, and an ugly man 
was sitting in his place. "I did not bargain for that," 
said the youth; "the bench is mine." The man tried 
to push him away, but the youth would not let him, and 
after giving him a violent push seated himself in his 
old place. Then more men fell down the chimney, one 
after the other; they brought nine thigh bones and two 
skulls, which they set up, and then played at ninepins. 
At this the youth wished also to play, so he asked whether 
he might join them. 

"Yes, if you have money!" 

"Money enough," he replied, "but your balls are 
not quite round." 



2'j2 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

So saying, he took up the skulls and, placing them on 
his lathe, turned them round. "Ah, now you will roll 
well," said he. "Holloa! now we will go at it merrily." 

So he played with them, and lost some of his money, 
but as it struck twelve everything disappeared. Then 
he lay down and went to sleep quietly. On the morrow 
the King came for news, and asked him how he had 
fared this time. 

"I have been playing ninepins," he replied, "and 
lost a couple of dollars." 

"Have you not shivered?" 

"No! I have enjoyed myself very much; but I 
wish some one would teach me what it is to shiver!" 

On the third night he sat down on his bench, saying 
in great vexation, "Oh, if I could only shiver!" When 
it grew late, six tall men came in, bearing a coffin between 
them. 

"Ah, ah," said he, "that is surely my little cousin, 
who died two days ago"; and beckoning with his finger 
he called, "Come, little cousin, come!" 

The men set the coffin on the ground, and he went 
up and took off the lid, and there lay a dead man within, 
and as he felt the face it was as cold as ice. 

"Stop a moment," he cried; "I will warm it in a 
trice," and stepping up to the fire he warmed his hands, 
and then laid them upon the face, but it remained cold. 
So he took up the body, and sitting down by the fire, he 
laid it on his lap and rubbed the arms that the blood 
might circulate again. But all this was of no avail, 
and he thought to himself if two lie in a bed together 
they warm each other; so he put the body in the bed, 
and covering it up laid himself down by its side. After 



A TALE OF ONE WHO TRAVELED 273 

a little while the body became warm and began to move 
about. 

"vSee, my cousin," he exclaimed, "have I not warmed 
you?" 

But the body got up and exclaimed, "Now I will 
strangle you." 

"Is that your gratitude?" cried the youth. "Then 
you shall get into your coffin again," and, taking it up, 
he threw the body in, and made the lid fast. Then the 
six men came in again and bore it away. "Oh, deary 
me," said he, "I shall never be able to shiver if I stop 
here all my lifetime!" At these words in came a man 
who was taller than all the others, and looked more 
horrible ; but he was very old and had a long white beard. 
"Oh, you wretch," he exclaimed, "now thou shalt learn 
what shivering means, for thou shalt die!" 

"Not so quick," answered the youth; "if I die I 
must be brought to it first." 

"I will quickly seize you," replied the ugly one. 

"Softly, softly; be not too sure. I am as strong as 
you, and perhaps stronger." 

"That we shall see," said the ugly man. "If you are 
stronger than I, I will let you go. Come, let us try ! " and 
he led him away through a dark passage to a smith's 
forge. Then taking up an ax, at one blow he cut through 
the anvil down to the ground. 

"I can do that still better," said the youth, and went 
to another anvil, while the old man followed him and 
watched him with his long beard hanging down. Then 
the youth took up an ax, and, splitting the anvil in one 
blow, wedged the old man's beard in it. "Now I have 
you; now death comes upon you!" and, taking up an 



274 GRIMM'S FAIRY TALES 

iron bar, he beat the old man until he groaned, and 
begged him to stop and he would give him great riches. 

So the youth drew out the ax, and loosed him. Then 
the old man led him back into the castle and showed 
him three chests full of gold in a cellar. "One share of 
this," said he, "belongs to the poor, another to the King, 
and the third to yourself." And just then it struck 
twelve, and the old man vanished, leaving the youth 
in the dark. "I must help myself out of here," said 
he, and by groping round he found his way back to his 
room and went to sleep by the fire. 

The next morning the King came and inquired, 
"Now have you learned to shiver?" 

"No," replied the youth; "what is it? My dead 
cousin came here, and a bearded man, who showed me a 
lot of gold down below; but what shivering means no 
one has shown me!" 

Then the King said, "You have won the castle, and 
shall marry my daughter." 

"This is all very fine," replied the youth, "but still 
I don't know what shivering means." 

So the gold was fetched, and the wedding was cele- 
brated, but the young Prince (for the youth was a Prince 
now), notwithstanding his love for his bride, and his 
great contentment, was still continually crying, "If I 
could but shiver! If I could but shiver!" 

At last it fell out in this wise: One of the chamber- 
maids said to the Princess, "Let me bring in my aid to 
teach him what shivering is." So she went to the brook 
which flowed through the garden, and drew up a pail 
of water full of little fish; and, at night, when the young 
Prince was asleep, his bride drew away the covering and 



A TALE OF ONE WHO TRAVELED 275 

poured the pail of cold water and the little fish over him, 
so that they slipped all about him. Then the Prince 
woke up and called out, "Oh! that makes me shiver! 
Dear wife, that makes me shiver! Yes, now I know 
what shivering means!" 



f 



1 



I 



^ 



l» ^ f 



\i 



i 



M 



! 



1 






->A - 



IT' 



V 






y 



■HH 



